Abstract
Universal spindle of Finishing Stand in Hot Strip Mill (HSM) plays a vital role in providing product thickness as per customer requirement. In a rolling mill, upper and lower work rolls are connected with single motor by their respective universal spindle. The spindle allows upward and downward movement of work rolls by allowing its shaft to bend up to ~15o angle. This bending is only possible by universal cross positioned at its both ends. One of the cross bearing located at operator side got failed during operation. All the site evidences were carefully noted down and piled up to find out the root cause of the failure. Metallurgical analysis like microstructure, hardness, inclusion rating and chemical analysis were carried to find out material related issue if any. Quality of lubricants used at different pins of cross bearing was also checked by crackle test. Evidences and metallurgical analysis results suggested that the cross bearing failed due to deterioration of lubricant quality during service. Lubricant deteriorated due to water ingress into cross bearing through its polymeric seal which was not properly applied at the time of its assembly.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Finishing mill spindleUniversal shaftUniversal cross
1. Introduction
1.1. Background
Premature failures are always affecting the production, quality, delivery and safety of equipment. It also increases the cost of production with decrease in productivity. Continuously cast slabs are being hot rolled into strip by rolling in Hot Strip Mill (HSM). A schematic of typical HSM has been shown in Fig. 1. A slab passes through reheating furnace to achieve temperature of 1200 °C in the slab. It is then passed through roughing mill followed by finishing mill [1]. Roughing mill is responsible for major reduction in slab thickness. 4 Hi 7 stand finishing mill does the final reduction in thickness in the material.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (215KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Layout of a typical HSM plant.

Cross bearing of Universal Spindle of HSM Finishing mill#1 was failed during service. During rolling, abnormal sound was reported from Finishing Mill#1 drive side. It was suspected that sound was coming from the spindle then it was taken out and inspected. The component was dismantled 2 months later. It was found that in drive side universal cross bearing, out of four bearing pins, one pin was found corroded and damaged too. Rollers of damaged bearing were found in broken condition. This component was supposed to be overhauled after one year of operation but it failed in 6 months.
1.2. Equipment
Fig. 2a is schematic to show construction of a stand in finishing mill. It is the assembly of work rolls, universal shaft and motor. Work rolls are driven by a single motor. Pinion- gears divides motor power between work rolls through universal spindles and rotating them at same speed but in opposite direction. A universal spindle consists of a shaft at centre, a flange at motor side and a wobbler at work role side. Flange and wobbler are connected to shaft by cross bearings. Cross bearing transmits rotatory power of shaft up to an angle of 15 degree, as a result, required strip thickness between work rolls can be achieved by changing the work rolls gap. A universal cross bearing is also known as a universal joint. A typical cross bearing is shown in Fig. 2b and c.
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (301KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2.

2. Experimental procedure
Failure site was visited to get information about operating condition. Diameter of rollers were measured by Mitutoyo digital micrometer. Chemical composition of smaller component like rollers were analyzed in Thermo Scientific ARL 4460 and bigger component were analyzed by portable XRF, Olympus DELTA Professional analyzer. Hardness of roller was measured in Emco Duravision 20 and hardness of bigger components were measured by SonoDur2, portable hardness tester. Smaller samples were cleaned with acetone in sonicator machine to remove dirt for visual examination, prior to metallographic sample preparation. Polished sample was etched in 3% Nital solution (3 mL HNO3 in 97 mL ethyl alcohol) and both un-etched and etched samples were examined under an optical microscope. In-situ metallography was carried out for pin of the failed bearing of the universal cross.
3. Results
3.1. Visual observation
Universal shaft was dismantled after 2 months of failure. It was observed that it was drive side cross bearing, which got failed during operation. Failure was seen in one out of 4 bearing pins only. Its inner race, rollers and outer race were found to be affected as shown in Fig. 3. Each elements of bearing were observed carefully to find out the cause of failure.
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (747KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Showing condition of (a) Inner race of cross bearings; (b) rollers; and (c) outer race after dismantling one of the cross bearing in as dismantled condition.

3.1.1. Inner race
Dismantled inner race was found without lubrication, its surface was severely corroded and sealant was found to be absent at surface (Fig. 4). Uniform pitting corrosion was observed throughout the surface area (Fig. 5c). It was observed that only one quadrant of the pin was deformed but total surface was only corroded (Fig. 5). These observations had been represented by a schematic in Fig. 5f.
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (109KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Effected pin of failed universal cross bearing showing condition of lubrication, surface appearance and condition of sealing material. Photograph of inner races.

Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (2MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. (a) Overall view of bearing pins/ inner races of cross bearing pin, showing good and failed inner races; (b) Deformation observed on failed bearing pin; (c) Showing pits formed on overall surface area of failed pin; (d) deformation on edge of failed pin; (e) Surface of failed pin with removed sealing material; and (f) Schematic to represent all observations of failed pin.

3.1.2. Rollers
Rollers were found to be broken into pieces. Pitting corrosion was also observed on the roller surface, cylindrical as well as fracture surface (Fig. 6a), this showed that pitting corrosion occurred after failure. Diameter of good rollers from other 3 good bearings were close to 18.0 mm while diameter of failed rollers was close to 16.7 mm (Fig. 6b). Different values of diameter of rollers are given in Table 1.
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (356KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. (a) Broken rollers, showing abraded fracture surface and pits. (b) Showing reduced diameter of rollers.

Table 1. Diameters of good and bad rollers.

Rollers	Diameter (mm)
Rollers of failed bearing	1	16.732
2	16.801
3	16.672
4	16.639
5	16.780
Not damaged rollers (other 3 bearings)	All	18.000
3.1.3. Lubrication test
Checking the presence of moisture in lubrication of other pins was important to find out root cause of this failure. Lubricant of other 3 good pins were tested by crackle test [2], which confirmed no presence of moisture in the lubricant.
3.1.4. Outer race
Pitting was observed on inner surface of outer race while one quadrant of outer race inner surface too was deformed (Fig. 7a-b). These observations have been represented through a schematic in Fig. 7c.
Fig. 7
Download: Download high-res image (701KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. (a) Inner surface of outer race (b) Closer view of inner surface of outer race showing deformation. (c) Schematic of top view of outer race showing region with deformation and region having pits without deformation.

3.1.5. Seal
Seal was used to prevent contamination and water ingress into the bearing. It was a set of two concentric rings, shown in Fig. 8a. One (named ‘seal 1’) was fitted on inner race and second one (named ‘seal 2’) was fitted on outer race. No deformation was observed on seal 1 while it was found that it had severe pits due to pitting corrosion, Fig. 8b. Slight deformation on seal-2 was noted that might be because of handling, Fig. 8c.
Fig. 8
Download: Download high-res image (895KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Photographs of seals of failed bearing. (a) Seal 2 is fitted with seal 1. (b) Corroded surface of seal 1 (c) Some deformation marks were observed on seal 2.

3.2. Chemical analysis
Chemical composition of rollers was conformed to the grade SAE52100, which is a bearing grade material. Pin and outer race chemistry was analyzed by portable XRF, as per its Mn and Cr content material was found closer to the bearing grade. Chemical compositions are given in Table 2.
Table 2. Result of chemical analysis (wt%).

Sample (Damaged Bearing)	C	Mn	S	P	Si	Cr	Ni	Mo
Roller	1.00	0.32	0.003	0.014	0.26	1.40	0.012	0.003
Pina	–	0.37	–	–	–	1.53	0.008	0.001
Outer racea	–	0.34	–	–	–	1.48	0.014	0.002
SAE 52100 Spec.	0.95/
1.10	0.25/
0.40	0.025
Max	0.025
Max	0.20/
0.35	1.30/
1.60	–	–
a
Chemical composition was analyzed by portable XRF by which elements with low atomic no. could not be detected.
3.3. Microstructural analysis
3.3.1. Inner race
In-situ metallography was carried out on surface of the damaged inner race to obtain the microstructure of inner race. Fully temper martensitic with fine carbides structure was obtained on inner race (Fig. 9).
Fig. 9
Download: Download high-res image (486KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. In-situ etched microstructure of the pin at 1000× magnification showing temper martensite with fine carbides. Etchant: 3% Nital solution.

3.3.2. Rollers
Micro specimens were prepared from cross section of damaged roller. Temper martensitic structure with uniformly distributed carbide microstructure was observed (Fig. 10a). Pits were also observed on the edges of the micro specimen (Fig. 10b). These pits were not deformed indicating these might have formed after failure. Roller edges showed deformed microstructure indicating grain deformation (Fig. 10c).
Fig. 10
Download: Download high-res image (721KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 10. (a): Etched Microstructure of the Roller at 1000× magnification showing tempered martensite with carbide precipitates (b) Unetched microstructure showing pits morphology, 100× (c) Pits morphology shown with martensitic grains, 100×.

3.4. Hardness
Hardness of all the bearing elements was found to be satisfactory. Hardness values are given in Table 3.
Table 3. Bulk hardness of component in HRC.

Sample	Average Hardness (HRC)
Roller	Not damaged	62
Damaged	63
Inner race	Not damaged 1	63
Not damaged 2	64
Not damaged 3	65
Damaged	62
4. Discussion
Visual observation and site observations revealed that only one out of 4 cross bearing pins got failed during operation. Bearing was dismantled, its rollers were broken into pieces and one quarter part of working surfaces of inner race and outer race got deformed. Diameter of rollers were dwindled by 6.6%. Inner race, outer race, rollers and metallic part of seals were severely corroded by pitting corrosion, the type of corrosion was confirmed when unetched roller sample was investigated in optical microscope. The corrosion was also observed on fracture surfaces of rollers. It indicated that pitting corrosion had taken place after failure, during the time, around 2 months, between failure and dismantling. Chemistry, microstructure and hardness of roller conformed to the specification (SAE52100). As per chromium and Manganese content, composition of all the inner race and out race of the failed cross bearings was also conformed to the bearing grade material. Microstructure of the failed pin was also satisfactory.
Non-metallic sealing material, which was used to fit Seal-1 with inner race, was absent on a certain region of inner race collar. In further investigation with concerned team it was found that the non-metallic sealing material was applied poorly between the surfaces. When the component put into the operation seal material of one of the bearings failed prematurely and then water ingress occurred through the failed seal. No lubricant was found on elements of the failed bearings it indicated that entered water washed away the lubricant present in the bearing. In the absence of lubricant film, abrasion on the rollers started and its diameter started reducing, simultaneously load on working area of races localized and increased. Rollers in high load between races got fractured and broken pieces of rollers created deformation marks on races which has been observed visually. Following is the explanation through schematic:
Breakage of rollers and deformation on only one side of inner and outer race can be explained by load distribution on bearing elements in the absence of lubrication. Fig. 11 was schematic drawn for better understanding. Diameter of rollers was gradually decreasing due to abrasion in the absence of lubrication. It would have increased the gap between contacting surfaces. As a result, load would concentrate at one region of bearing only. Load on rollers as well as gap between inner race and outer race would not be uniform. In the case of diameter reduction of rollers, rollers will not be in contact with complete working surface of inner and outer race. Fig. 11a&b is the cross section of cross bearing from side view and Fig. 11c&d is the cross section of pin from top view. Fig. 11a&c shows uniform gap between inner race and outer race as there is no diameter reduction in rollers. When rollers start abrading in the absence of lubricant, its diameter will be reduced and would create a situation like Fig. 11b&d. Fig. 10a&c shows uniform load distribution over all rollers when no diameter reduction occurred. Fig. 10b&d shows uneven gap between inner race and outer race as a result higher load over few rollers. High load over few rollers would result into deformation of rollers, inner race and outer race at one quadrant only.
Fig. 11
Download: Download high-res image (725KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 11. (a) Uniform gap between inner race and outer race (b) Uneven gap between inner race and outer race as a result higher load over few roller (c) Uniform load distribution over all rollers when there would not be any abraded roller (d) Load concentrated over bearing element of only one quadrant led to deformation.

5. Conclusion
Out of 4 bearings of cross bearing, only 1 failed due to following reasons:
•
Abnormal sound from one bearing was coming out due to rolling of failed rollers between inner and outer race.
•
Rollers got failed due to excessive friction and compressive load between rollers and races, resulting into further abrasion. This led to higher localized load at one quadrant area of races and finally deformation.
•
Excessive friction was imparted due to absence of lubrication in bearing.
•
Half of the collar of inner race was having seal whereas the other half did not have seal and was rusted. It was further enquired and found out that seal was not applied properly. Water ingress through the poorly applied seal on the collar had washed away the existing lubricant.
•
So, the bearing got failed due to water ingress through collar because of poorly applied seal.