Abstract
Direct contact cooling technology is a promising method for addressing the thermal issues of lithium-ion batteries. However, the high cost of dielectric fluids used for direct contact cooling hinders its large-scale commercialization. Herein, we develop a novel water-based direct contact cooling (WDC) system for the thermal management of prismatic lithium-ion batteries. This system employs battery surface insulation coatings instead of dielectric fluids to apply water-based coolants. It also designs symmetric serpentine channels for efficient heat dissipation from the battery surface rather than immersing it in the coolant. We conduct water resistance tests on the insulation coating and explore the temperature control capabilities of the system under different conditions. The results indicate that a 10 μm thick polyurethane coating provides excellent electrical protection with a low water absorption rate of 0.07 %. The maximum battery temperature remains below 35 °C, with a temperature difference maintained within 4 °C, under rapid charge and discharge cycling and dynamic stress testing conditions. Compared to the traditional noncontact cooling system, the maximum temperature is reduced by 20.88 %, and the pressure drop is also 79.78 % lower. Furthermore, the volume of coolant required for a single battery in this system is only 10.66 cm3, significantly reducing system costs and weight compared to the immersion cooling system. This research provides a simple and effective strategy to lower the costs of direct contact cooling systems while maintaining high battery thermal management performance under demanding operating conditions.
Graphical abstract
Unlabelled Image
Download: Download high-res image (230KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Water-based direct contact coolingBattery thermal managementLithium-ion batteries
Nomenclature
Acronyms
BTMSs
battery thermal management systems
CC
constant current
CV
constant voltage
DST
dynamic stress test
DOD
depth of discharge
E
battery potential (V)
EV
electric vehicle
I
current (A)
LIB
lithium-ion battery
OCV
open circuit voltage (V)
P
pressure (Pa)
Qbattery
heat generated by the battery (W)
Qirrev
irreversible heat generation (W)
QLiquid
heat absorbed by the coolant (W)
Qrev
reversible heat generation (W)
Qv
volumetric flow rate (mL/min)
SOC
state of charge
T
temperature of the battery (°C)
Tdiff
temperature difference (°C)
Tmax
maximum temperature (°C)
Tmean
mean temperature
V
voltage (V)
WDC
water-based direct contact cooling
r
internal resistance (Ω)
r0
initial volume resistivity (Ω·m)
r1
volume resistivity after immersion (Ω·m)
w0
initial weight (g)
w1
weight after immersion (g)
Greek symbol
ρ
water absorption rate
Δ
change
Subscripts
max
maximum
diff
difference
1. Introduction
Carbon neutrality has been a driving force for the vigorous development of clean energy technologies in recent years. Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) take on a vital role in the widespread adoption of electric vehicles (EVs), which have effectively mitigated the issues of energy scarcity and greenhouse gas emissions [[1], [2], [3]]. However, temperature is a crucial factor influencing the performance of LIBs. It is widely acknowledged that the operating temperature range for the LIBs should be between 15 °C and 35 °C, with a temperature difference of less than 5 °C. Once the operational temperature reaches 40 °C, the lifespan of LIBs is shortened by two months for every increase of 1 °C. The battery capacity drops by 1.5 %–2 % for every 5 °C rise in temperature gradient [[4], [5], [6], [7], [8]]. When the heat produced by the battery cannot be effectively dissipated, the temperature will persistently increase, which results in a substantial decrease in the output power and poses the potential risk of thermal runaway, culminating in an explosion [[9], [10], [11]]. Moreover, the reduction in electrolyte conductivity is caused by lower temperatures, resulting in a slowing of ion transport rates, which increases the internal resistance and consequently reduces the capacity of LIBs [12,13]. Therefore, researchers have proposed various battery thermal management systems (BTMSs), essential in managing the peak temperature and improving temperature consistency, enabling the battery to operate safely in an optimal operating environment.
Currently, BTMSs can be categorized into air cooling [14], liquid cooling [15,16], phase change material cooling [17], and heat pipe cooling [18], according to active and passive methods. Liquid cooling is one of the most common BTMSs for EVs, with the advantages of a high heat dissipation rate of the working fluid. Generally, liquid cooling encompasses noncontact cooling and direct contact cooling (also known as immersion cooling) [19,20]. Noncontact cooling can effectively maintain a favorable temperature distribution within battery packs [21,22]. However, its application is mainly limited by significant thermal resistance. In contrast, direct contact cooling involves the coolant in contact with the battery, eliminating contact thermal resistance and significantly improving the heat dissipation rate. Direct contact cooling has widespread applications in various fields, such as power electronics and data centers [23,24]. Also, driven by the policy of rapid charging and discharging of high-capacity power batteries, it is recognized as a cooling method with considerable potential for BTMSs [[25], [26], [27]].
Direct contact cooling includes single-phase and two-phase types according to the coolant state presented in the cooling process [28,29]. The coolant typically possesses the features of excellent insulation, high ignition, and high flash points. The working principle of the two-phase type is that the coolant undergoes phase transition during the heat absorption process, which can take away a large amount of heat released by the battery. Thus, coolants with a lower boiling point, such as fluoride liquid, are usually applied [[30], [31], [32], [33]]. However, this cooling method demands a stricter system design because boiling is pressure-dependent, and heat transfer deterioration will occur once boiling is transited from the nuclear state to the film state. Thus, two-phase direct contact cooling is still in the laboratory research stage.
Compared to the two-phase type, the single-phase type is relatively accessible as the coolant does not involve a phase transition process. Liu et al. [34] developed a thermal management system for batteries immersed in transformer oil to study their effectiveness for battery cooling. Satyanarayana et al. [35] compared the performance of forced air cooling, therminol oil immersion cooling, and mineral oil immersion cooling of 18,650 battery packs. Huang et al. [36] proposed a novel ester coolant (pentaerythritol ester) for immersion cooling. They claimed that pentaerythritol ester achieved a significant energy consumption reduction of 55.4 % compared to mineral oil and maintained the temperature inhomogeneity of less than 0.7 K at a discharge rate of 3 C. Dubey et al. [37] performed a comparative analysis of cold plate cooling and immersion cooling for 21,700 battery modules. The results demonstrated that immersion cooling achieved a significantly higher heat transfer efficiency (2.5–3 times) than noncontact cooling, particularly at high discharge rates.
Moreover, many researchers explored the potential of water-based direct contact cooling (WDC) systems due to their enhanced cooling capacity and cost-effectiveness. Li et al. [38] devised an immersive battery thermal management system employing a silicone sealant for 18,650 cylindrical batteries. The system effectively maintained the maximum battery temperature below 35 °C while limiting the temperature difference to 0.5 °C. However, the energy density is slightly reduced due to the 3 mm thickness of the silicone sealant. Luo et al. [39] designed a submerged cooling structure with isolated tabs for 18,650 lithium-ion batteries, and the maximum battery temperature was below 50 °C when the coolant flow rate was over 1000 mL/min. However, it is essential to note that submersion of the battery in water may result in battery deterioration due to moisture. In the field of power electronics, Birbarah et al. [40] proposed a water-based fluid immersion cooling system and verified that a 1-μm-thick Parylene C provided adequate electrical protection and found that the heat flow density of water-glycol was two twice that of the dielectric fluid used for the test.
These studies above indicate that single-phase direct contact cooling systems possess superior temperature control capabilities compared to traditional cooling systems. Besides, water-based coolants can significantly reduce the costs of contact cooling systems while improving the cooling performance, ensuring that they are more practical and commercially viable than dielectric fluids. However, research on direct contact cooling systems using water-based coolants is sporadic. Additionally, there is a lack of information in the existing literature on WDC systems applied to square batteries. Therefore, conducting more in-depth investigations into the safety and cooling performance of WDC systems for square power batteries is worthwhile.
In this study, we propose a novel WDC system for battery thermal management to fill the research gaps above. Unlike traditional immersion cooling systems, the batteries are usually fully immersed in the high-cost dielectric fluid. The proposed WDC system employs a non-dielectric fluid (deionized water) as the coolant and is designed with flow paths that allow the coolant to contact only the cell's surface. Additionally, polyurethane is selected as the insulating layer for electrical protection due to its excellent insulating and waterproof performance. Furthermore, we evaluate the temperature control performance at different coolant flow rates and verify the thermal cycling reliability of the cooling system through rapid charge/discharge cycle tests and Dynamic Stress Test (DST). Compared with noncontact and immersion cooling systems, the WDC system demonstrates excellent thermal control performance and cost-effectiveness, providing a feasible strategy to commercialize direct contact cooling systems.
2. Methodology
2.1. Design of the direct contact cooling system
The battery employed in this work is a large-scale 32 Ah square-type battery (EVE, LF32) with a nominal voltage of 3.2 V. The parameters of the cell are presented in Table 1. We applied a 10-μm-thick polyurethane coating to the cell surface to protect it from moisture and aging, as shown in Fig. 1(a). Also, this thin insulating coating does not significantly affect the battery temperature, as shown in Fig. S4. The polyurethane coating was tested for insulation and waterproof performance, and the detailed results are described in Section 4.1. The cell was sandwiched between the two resin shells (8228 type) carved with flow channels manufactured by 3D printing (Fig. 1(b)). To address the problem of inefficient end cooling of a U-shaped channel, we designed a parallel serpentine symmetric channel with a single inlet and outlet (Fig. 1(c)), and a 40° wedge angle was set at the central of the channel for coolant distribution, as shown in Fig. 1(d). The physical diagrams are shown in Fig. 1(e–f). Silicone gaskets were added between the flow channels and the cell so they could be in close contact, and they were fastened with sixteen M5 bolts and nuts to prevent leakage. More details of the flow channels are illustrated in Table 2. Organic silicone was also applied to seal the module externally to avoid short circuits. Note that deionized water was selected as the coolant because of its low cost, high thermal conductivity, and excellent heat dissipation performance. The properties of deionized water are shown in Table 3.
Table 1. Parameters of the cell.

Parameter	Value
Nominal capacity	32 Ah
Voltage range	2.5–3.65 V
Nominal voltage	3.2 V
Electrode material	Anode: graphite
Cathode: LiFePO4
Dimensions	148 mm × 27 mm × 92 mm
Thermal conductivity	
Density	1958 kg/m3
Specific heat capacity	1200 J/(kg·K)
Mass weight	720 g ± 50 g
Tab material	Positive: aluminum
Negative: copper
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (898KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Structural and physical drawings of the WDC system for thermal management of batteries: (a) surface insulation process, (b) the WDC system, (c) exploded view of the WDC system, (d) symmetrical serpentine channels, (e) physical drawing of the WDC system, and (f) the printed flow channels.

Table 2. Parameters of the flow channel.

Symbol	Value
d1	102.00 mm
d2	75.60 mm
d3	75.60 mm
l1	168.00 mm
l2	20.95 mm
l3	13.60 mm
l4	10.45 mm
l5	13.00 mm
θ	40°
Table 3. Properties of deionized water.

Property	Deionized water
Density	998 kg/m3
Thermal conductivity	0.59 W/(m·K)
Specific heat capacity	4182 J/(kg·K)
Kinematic viscosity	1 cSt
2.2. Experimental setup and methods
As illustrated in Fig. 2(a), the experimental system consists of a battery testing system, a cooling system, and a data acquisition system. Fig. 2(b) shows the physical map. The battery testing system (NEWARE, BTS-CT7000-60A220V) was used to control the battery operation and record data, such as voltage, current, and capacity, through the BTS8.0 software. A peristaltic pump (LEADFLUID, BT601L) circulated water from the low-temperature thermostat tank (SCIENTZ, DC-0515) to the system through flexible pipes. During the experiment, thermocouples (K-type) were positioned on both sides of the battery, and a total of ten thermocouples were applied to monitor the temperature variations. However, based on the experimental results (see Fig. S5), we found that the temperature distributions on both sides of the battery were very close. Therefore, only the temperature values on one side were presented for simplicity, as depicted in Fig. 2(c). In addition, we monitored the inlet and outlet temperatures of the coolant with two thermocouples to determine the heat dissipation rate, and a total of seven thermocouples were arranged within this system. A differential pressure transmitter (MEACON, MIK-3051) monitored the pressure drop of the WDC system. The data acquisition instrument (Keysight, DAQ970A) simultaneously recorded temperature and pressure drop values and was linked to the PC via a USB cable. In addition, the WDC system was placed in an environment chamber (NEWARE, MGDW225-20H) for better control of the ambient temperature.
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. (a) Schematic diagram and (b) photographs of the experimental setup. (c) Positions of the thermocouples.

During experiments, the environment chamber was first set to 25 °C and stabilized for two hours, ensuring a consistent and uniform temperature distribution. Deionized water was then pumped into the WDC system, and the peristaltic pump was halted upon achieving a steady water flow. The battery was subsequently charged in constant current (CC) and constant voltage (CV) mode with the cutoff voltage and current of 3.65 V and 0.16 A, respectively, and rested for an hour. The discharge experiment started once the coolant outlet temperature stabilized at 25 °C.
Furthermore, the measured module without coolant was considered the natural convection cooling case. Initially, we analyzed the electrothermal behaviors of the battery. To ensure the experimental process's safety, we tested the insulating and waterproof performance of the polyurethane coating. Simultaneously, we examined the electrical performance of the battery coated with polyurethane during the discharge process. Besides, we explored various aspects to comprehensively evaluate the performance of the WDC system, including coolant flow direction, flow rate, high and low-temperature operating environments, and charge/discharge cycles.
2.3. Uncertainty analysis
The main errors in the experiments involve the temperature measured by K-type thermocouples, the current and voltage recorded by the battery testing apparatus, and the pressure drop assessed by the differential pressure transmitter. The uncertainty analysis of these parameters was performed according to [41]. The uncertainty can be calculated by Eq. (1), and the detailed uncertainties are summarized in Table 4.
(1)
where 
 and 
 are the equipment uncertainty and experimental uncertainty, respectively.
Table 4. Experimental uncertainties of parameters.

Name	Measuring instrument	Accuracy	Uncertainty
Temperature	K type thermocouples	±0.5 °C	±0.18 °C
Voltage	Battery testing system	±0.02 %	±0.0013 V
Current	Battery testing system	±0.05 %	±0.0012 A
Volumetric flow rate	Peristaltic pump	±0.003 L/min	±0.0046 L/min
3. Thermal characterization of the battery
Heat generation within the battery is closely related to electrochemical reactions and electron transfer. The total heat production includes irreversible heat (ohmic and polarization heat) and reversible heat (electrochemical reaction heat) [42], as presented in Eq. (2). When the battery is charged or discharged slowly, the reversible heat shows a noticeable impact on the total heat generation [43]. However, as the discharge rate increases, the proportion of irreversible heat to the total heat generation rises significantly, diminishing the influence of reversible heat [44,45]. Due to the high current rates in electric vehicle applications, the irreversible heat generation is higher than the reversible heat generation, so it is reasonable to disregard the reversible heat contribution [46]. Therefore, this study simplifies heat production by assuming that non-reversible heat is the primary source of total heat production, as shown in Eq. (3).
(2)
(3)
where 
 is the total heat generation. 
 and 
 are irreversible and reversible heat generation, respectively. 
 is the variation of open circuit voltage (
) with temperature (
) as a function of the state of charge (
). 
 and 
 denote the current and internal resistance, accordingly.
To explore the connection between 
 and 
, we conducted the DC pulse tests, and the procedures are given as follows:
(a)
Set the temperature of the environmental chamber to 25 °C and charge the cell with 0.5C-CC & CV to SOC = 100 %, followed by resting the cell for 2 h to achieve thermal equilibrium with the environment.
(b)
The cell was then subjected to the pulse test for 24 s at desired discharge rates and rested for 1800 s. The voltage and current sequences were recorded to calculate the cell's internal resistance.
(c)
Repeat (a–b) at 1 C, 1.5 C, and 2 C discharge rates until the cell reaches a cutoff voltage of 2.5 V.
4. Results and discussion
4.1. Electrothermal performance
Exact information on the electrothermal performance of the battery is necessary for designing thermal management systems. Fig. 3(a) depicts the voltage and current during the tests, and the internal resistance was calculated at different depths of discharge (DOD) of various discharge rates (1 C, 1.5 C, and 2 C) according to Eq. (4). The discharge resistance grew slowly when the DOD was below 80 %, but increased sharply at higher DOD (Fig. 3(b)). This observation highlights the close relationship between the battery's internal resistance and SOC. A higher discharge rate would result in more heat generation, accelerating the migration rate of electrons, which is manifested at a macroscopic level by reducing the internal resistance.
(4)
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (426KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Electrothermal performance of the battery. (a) Pulse test sequences. (b) Battery internal resistance at various discharge rates. (c) Battery heat production rate. (d) Battery temperature evolutions.

The total heat generation of the battery was estimated by using the average internal resistance values at different discharge multiplicities, and the heat generation of the battery was 4.13 W, 8.49 W, and 13.67 W at 1 C, 1.5 C, and 2 C discharge, respectively (Fig. 3(c)). Under natural convection cooling, the battery temperature gradually rose, reaching a maximum of over 40 °C during discharging at 2 C (Fig. 3(d)). This high temperature negatively impacted the battery's performance. Therefore, it is imperative to implement thermal management to ensure secure and high-performance operation.
4.2. Insulation test and electrical performance benchmarking
Because the battery surface insulation strategy was applied instead of dielectric fluids for the proposed WDC system, the insulation material should possess excellent insulation and waterproof performance to ensure a safe and dry operating environment for the battery. To evaluate the insulation capability of the polyurethane coating used in this work, we sprayed polyurethane with a thickness of about 10 μm on the surface of an aluminum plate (30 mm × 30 mm × 1 mm) and measured the initial weight and volume resistivity, denoted as 
 and 
, respectively. Then, the coated plate was immersed in a beaker with deionized water for 144 h, and the plate weight was measured every 24 h during this period. When the plate weight nearly stabilized, we recorded the weight 
 and calculated the water absorption rate (
). Subsequently, the resistivity was measured again, denoted as 
. As shown in Fig. 4(a), the coated plate exhibited a low water absorption rate of 0.07 %, implying the excellent water resistance of the employed coating. Although the volume resistivity decreased from 1.1 × 108 Ω·m to 0.96 × 108 Ω·m after the immersion test, the breakdown voltage was still up to 460 V, which exhibits acceptable safety performance. It is evident that there is still room for improvement in the electrical insulating performance of the coating. Increasing the thickness of the coating is the simplest and most effective method to enhance its breakdown resistance [47]. Additionally, adding nanoparticles to improve the interfacial interactions between the polymer matrixes can further enhance its insulation properties, which will be our focus in the future. Moreover, we examined the electrical performance of the uncoated battery subjected to natural convection cooling and the coated one immersed in water. As shown in Fig. 4(b), the voltage variation for the two cases was within 3 %, demonstrating that the polyurethane coating can provide reliable electrical protection for the safe operation of the WDC system.
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (489KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. (a) Insulation test of the polyurethane coating. (b) Variations of the electrical performance of the battery.

4.3. Effects of the water flow direction
As shown in Fig. 5(a), the coolant first absorbs the heat from the middle part of the battery when it flows from the top to the bottom and then the heat from both sides and vice versa. It should be noted that setting two independent inlets in the left and right flow channels can also achieve equal flow velocity at the left and right flow channels. We have considered this method at the beginning of the design. However, it would bring about a complex piping design for the BTMS. Therefore, we select the wedge angle design proposed to achieve uniform coolant distribution while reducing the piping's complexity.
Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (612KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. (a) Schematic of the flow modes. (b) Variations of the temperature difference and maximum temperature with flow rate. (c) Comparisons of the temperature distributions at 75 mL/min. (d) Comparisons of the heat dissipated by the coolant.

With the flow rate increased from 30 mL/min to 90 mL/min, the battery's temperature difference and maximum temperature declined gradually for the two feeding modes (Fig. 5(b)). Here, the battery temperature difference is defined as the difference between the maximum and minimum temperature of the battery surface. In particular, the bottom-feeding mode's maximum temperature was higher than that of the top-feeding one. However, the temperature difference presented the opposite trend because the 40° wedge angle was set at the inlet of the top-feeding mode, which reduces the thermal boundary layer and accelerates the fluid flow for heat transfer enhancement. When the coolant flows in from the bottom, it first cools both sides of the battery, and the flow rate slows down as the coolant converges into the central part of the flow channel. As a result, the coolant temperature tends to be close in each flow channel, leading to a relatively uniform temperature distribution. Specifically, take the coolant flow rate of 75 mL/min as an example. The middle temperature (T5) was the lowest, and the temperature close to the tabs was much higher in the top-feeding mode (Fig. 5(c)). The maximum temperature of the cell was 33.26 °C, with a temperature difference of 3.38 °C. When in the bottom-feeding mode, the temperatures (T1 and T3) on the positive side were higher than those on the negative side (T2 and T4), which can be attributed to the coolant's uneven distribution in the flow channel resulting from the pressure difference, with a temperature difference of 3.15 °C. It was indicated that the bottom-feeding mode is more sensitive to pressure resistance than the top-feeding mode. In actual applications, minimizing the interference of the thermocouples on the flow and precision machining of the flow channel is necessary to ensure the coolant's symmetrical distribution. Note that the heat dissipation rate of the top-feeding mode is more significant than that of the bottom-feeding one at various flow rates (Fig. 5(d)), and the top-feeding mode presents better flow consistency. Thus, this paper selected the top-feeding mode for subsequent experiments.
4.4. Effects of the flow rates
The coolant flow rate is crucial in regulating the battery's temperature in the liquid-cooled BTMSs. We conducted experiments at three different discharge rates for five volumetric flow rates to examine the relationship between the coolant flow rate and the battery's performance in the WDC system. The chamber temperature and coolant inlet temperature were maintained at 25 °C. As indicated in Fig. 6(a–c), the maximum temperature of the battery under natural convection cooling increased by 9.17 °C, 13.15 °C, and 17.80 °C at 1 C, 1.5 C, and 2 C discharge rates, respectively. When water-based direct cooling was applied to the battery at a coolant flow rate of 90 mL/min, the maximum temperature of the battery was reduced by 16.8 %, 20.2 %, and 23.8 %, respectively, which highlights the effectiveness of the proposed cooling system in controlling the battery temperature. However, forced convection cooling resulted in a more considerable temperature difference, which could be reduced by improving the coolant flow rate. The temperature differences of the battery were lowest at 90 mL/min, which was 1.8 °C, 1.97 °C, and 3.21 °C, for 1 C, 1.5 C, and 2 C, respectively.
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (344KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Variations of the battery maximum temperature at (a) 1 C, (b) 1.5 C, and (c) 2 C. (d) The power consumption and pressure drop. (e) The temperature difference and maximum temperature at various discharge rates. (f) The heat dissipation rate and coolant output temperature at different discharge rates.

It is worth noting that the pressure drop is almost proportional to the square of the flow rate (Fig. 6(d)). As the flow rate increased from 45 mL/min to 90 mL/min, the pressure drop increased by 133.46 %, leading to a 366.90 % increase in the system power consumption. In particular, as shown in Fig. 6(e), the maximum temperature decreased by 12.9 % when the flow rate increased from 0 mL/min to 45 mL/min, but a further increase to 90 mL/min only resulted in a 2.3 % reduce in the maximum temperature. The main reason is that when the convective heat transfer rate surpasses the battery's heat generation rate, the overall heat dissipation rate becomes constant, meaning there is a critical flow rate. Notably, 45 mL/min can be considered as the critical flow rate at 1 C discharge, with a system power consumption as low as 0.19 mW. Similarly, the optimal flow rates are 60 mL/min and 75 mL/min at 1.5 C and 2 C discharge, respectively.
Additionally, at the same coolant flow rate, more heat was removed through convective heat transfer with the rising discharge rate (Fig. 6(f)). The maximum heat dissipation at 90 mL/min reached 3.37 W (1 C), 5.62 W (1.5 C), and 8.51 W (2 C), respectively, and the corresponding coolant outlet temperature was the lowest. It is because, at high-rate discharges, the current acting on the battery is higher, increasing joule heat within it and resulting in a significant overall heat production increase. The coolant outlet temperature is higher at high-rate discharges than at low-rate discharges. At 30 mL/min, the coolant outlet temperature at a 2 C discharge was 5.6 % higher than that at a 1 C discharge, indicating more heat absorption.
4.5. Effects of the ambient temperature
To explore the environmental adaptability of the proposed cooling system, we set the environment chamber to 10 °C, 25 °C, and 40 °C to simulate daily temperature variations. As shown in Fig. 7(a–c), the average battery temperatures during the discharge process were 19.3 °C, 29.6 °C, and 33.6 °C at the ambient temperature of 10 °C, 25 °C, and 40 °C, respectively. Although the temperature variation rate increased as the end of discharge approached, the maximum temperature remained in the range of 25–40 °C, with average temperature differences of 0.71 °C, 2.27 °C, and 5.56 °C, respectively. The temperature difference mainly underwent three stages during the discharge process if the ambient temperature was below the coolant temperature. In the first stage, the coolant heated the battery early in discharge, resulting in a large temperature gradient, and the temperature difference reached 6.59 °C at around 100 s. In the second stage, the heat production rate gradually increased, but the convective heat transfer rate remained unchanged, and the discharge period was about 800–1200 s, leading to the minimum temperature difference of 0.02 °C. In the third stage, the heat generated rate exceeded the heat dissipation rate, so the battery temperature difference increased from 1200 s onwards. Three similar stages were also found when the ambient temperature exceeded the coolant temperature. As the ambient temperature intensified from 10 °C to 40 °C, the average temperature difference rose by 683.1 %, indicating that more uniform temperature distributions occur at lower ambient temperatures.
Fig. 7
Download: Download high-res image (844KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Variations of the temperature difference and maximum temperature with time at a 2 C discharge for different ambient temperatures (a) 10 °C, (b) 25 °C, and (c) 40 °C. (d) Variations of the battery voltage with time at 10 °C.

However, note that the ionic conductivity and diffusion coefficient reduce at lower temperatures, causing the available capacity of the battery to decrease. When the temperature reached 10 °C, the discharge time of the battery at 2 C was 1720 s, and the available capacity of the battery was reduced by 4.7 % compared to the rated capacity. Under the same condition, the discharge time was 1745 s when water the battery was heated by water, and the available capacity increased by 1.5 % compared to the unheated case (Fig. 7(d)).
Moreover, the battery voltage dropped to 3.01 V without heating and rose by a maximum of 1.1 % during the discharge due to the increased battery temperature. When heated by the 25 °C coolant, the battery voltage dropped to 3.05 V during discharge and rose to a maximum value of 1.7 %. The main reason is that heating the battery with a coolant raises the battery's operating temperature and reduces the resistance in the diffusion and migration processes. As a result, the discharge plateau rises, enhancing the available capacity under high-rate discharge conditions at low temperatures. The proposed WDC system could cool and preheat the battery efficiently at low ambient temperatures.
4.6. Cyclic performance of the system
4.6.1. Fast charge and discharge test
To investigate the long-term thermal management stability of the proposed system, we conducted a 1 C–2 C fast charge-discharge cycle test on the battery. The cyclic process is as follows:
(a)
Discharge in CC mode at 2 C (64 A) until the voltage is 2.5 V.
(b)
Rest for 10 min and then charge in CC-CV mode at 1 C (32 A) until the current is 0.05 C (0.16 A).
(c)
Repeat steps (a–b) four times until the battery reaches thermal equilibrium with the environment.
As illustrated in Fig. 8, the battery temperature presented a significant increase during the 2 C discharge process because of the exothermic nature of the battery. Throughout the CC charge stage, the battery temperature continued to rise as the heat absorbed by the electrochemical reaction was insufficient to offset the joule heat. However, once the voltage reached 3.65 V, the current decreased. As a result, the heat absorbed by the electrochemical reaction exceeded the joule heat, lowering the battery temperature.
Fig. 8
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Variations of the cell voltage, temperature, and temperature difference with time during the cyclic tests under (a) natural convection cooling and (b) direct contact cooling. (c) The current sequence and (d) temperature variation curves of the battery with the WDC system in the DST dynamic service test.

Moreover, during natural convection cooling, the maximum temperature continued to rise with the prolonged cycles. The maximum temperatures exceeded 40 °C during the four thermal cycles, which were 40.77 °C, 45.36 °C, 46.78 °C, and 47.48 °C, respectively. The temperature difference varied in the opposite direction. At the end of the first discharge, the maximum temperature difference was 2.3 °C, and it gradually decreased and stabilized as the number of cycles increased. This variation can be attributed to the gradual rise in the initial discharge temperature, which leads to an overall increase in the battery temperature and improves the uniformity of the temperature distribution.
As for the direct contact cooling case, the maximum temperature (around 35 °C) of the battery at the end of each discharge was almost the same (Fig. 8(b)). It decreased by approximately 25.3 % compared to natural convection cooling, demonstrating excellent temperature control performance. After cycling, it took nearly 4 h for the battery to reach thermal equilibrium with the surrounding environment under the natural convection cooling condition. In contrast, the WDC system shortened this time by 152.6 % because the flowing coolant rapidly dissipated the residual heat within the battery and restored the battery temperature to 27 °C. In addition, the maximum temperature difference throughout the cycle was 3.87 °C, which could be further reduced by optimizing the flow channel structure.
4.6.2. DST dynamic service test
The battery's current shocks and abrupt current switches may occur in practical applications. Therefore, we further assessed the reliability of the proposed WDC system under these conditions using the Urban Dynamometer Driving Schedule (UDDS) and DST. The test sequences were designed based on the battery database developed by the University of Maryland [48], as depicted in Fig. 8(c). Also, we maintained the ambient and coolant temperatures at 25 °C, ensuring a consistent coolant flow rate of 75 mL/min.
Fig. 8(d) illustrates that the battery temperature increased gradually during operation. With the WDC system, we successfully limited the maximum battery temperature to 28.82 °C, ensuring the battery works within the optimal temperature range. This observation emphasizes the WDC system's capability to transfer the heat generated within the battery under harsh conditions. Furthermore, we discovered that the temperature difference surface throughout the test was less than 2.34 °C, demonstrating excellent temperature uniformity. Nonetheless, the WDC system's continuous operation leads to unnecessary system energy consumption when the battery temperature is not high. Therefore, intermittent operation of the WDC system according to the real-time temperature of the battery seems a more efficient strategy, which shows potential for further exploration and enhancement.
4.7. Performance comparison between noncontact and direct contact cooling systems
To confirm the effectiveness of the proposed cooling system, we further compared the thermal management performance of the proposed direct contact cooling system with the traditional noncontact (indirect) cooling system with cold plates, which is widely used for square batteries [49]. Fig. 9(a) shows the traditional noncontact cooling system for a 50 V Li-ion battery module with 16 cells connected in series, where a silica gel plate (SGP) was laid between the batteries [50], and a cold plate with a serpentine flow channel placed at the bottom (Fig. 9(b)). The total thickness of the cold plate is 6 mm, the channel depth is 2 mm, and the inlet and outlet widths are 13 mm. Fig. 9(c) shows the proposed contact cooling system, in which water flows from the main inlet pipe through various branch pipes to the main outlet pipe. The flow channel is the same as described in Section 2.1. For simplicity, the detailed numerical methods are provided in S1–S3 of the Supplementary material.
Fig. 9
Download: Download high-res image (596KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. The structure of a 50 V Li-ion battery of (a) direct cooling system, (b) conventional cold plate, and (c) direct contact cooling system.

As shown in Fig. 10(a), the lowest temperature of the battery module appears near the fluid inlet at the bottom of the battery for the noncontact cooling system, and the high-temperature region is mainly concentrated in the middle of the battery module. Besides, the temperature consistency does not improve much with the increasing flow velocity. In contrast, the lowest temperature of the battery module appears on the battery surface in contact with the coolant for the contact cooling system, and the high-temperature region is concentrated on the side of the battery module. The high-temperature area gradually moves backward with an increase in the coolant flow rate. This is because increasing the water flow rate enhances the convective heat transfer rate of water on both sides of the battery surface, contributing to the enhancement of temperature consistency. As shown in Fig. 9(b–c), at the same flow rate, the maximum temperature of the battery module with contact cooling decreased by 6.26 °C, 7.12 °C, 7.61 °C, 7.90 °C, and 8.07 °C, and the average temperature decreased by 3.62 °C, 4.02 °C, 4.23 °C, 4.35 °C, and 4.42 °C, at the velocity of 0.22 m/s, 0.32 m/s, 0.43 m/s 0.54 m/s, and 0.65 m/s, respectively, compared to those of the module with noncontact cooling, demonstrating the excellent temperature control capability of the proposed system.
Fig. 10
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 10. Comparisons of the temperature and pressure drop of the 50 V Li-ion battery module with indirect and direct liquid cooling.

In addition, we compared the pressure drops of the two cooling systems, as their value can reflect the flow of power consumption. As shown in Fig. 10(d), the pressure drop of the direct contact cooling system was significantly lower than that of the traditional noncontact cooling system, and the pressure drop decreased by 0.65 kPa, 0.98 kPa, 1.38 kPa, 1.83 kPa, and 2.35 kPa, respectively at five different flow velocities. The pressure drop reduction is up to 79.78 % at the coolant flow velocity of 0.22 m/s, demonstrating the superiority of the water-based contact cooling system for power consumption reduction. Besides, the economic analysis (S6 of the Supplementary material) showed that the average volume of coolant per battery for the WDC system could be reduced considerably, which results in significant economic benefits.
5. Conclusions
This work proposed a novel WDC system for battery thermal management. The innovation involved battery insulation with polyurethane coating instead of expensive dielectric fluids, and symmetric serpentine channels were applied instead of immersing the battery in the coolant for heat transfer enhancement. The main conclusions are as follows:
(1)
The 10 μm-thick polyurethane coating presented a low water absorption rate of 0.07 % and high resistance above 108 Ω·m, providing excellent electrical protection.
(2)
The heat dissipation rate of the top-feeding mode exceeded that of the bottom-feeding one, and the maximum temperatures decreased by 16.8 %, 26.4 %, and 27.6 % at 1 C, 1.5 C, and 2 C discharge rates, respectively.
(3)
During fast charging and discharging cycles and DST dynamic condition tests, the proposed system could maintain the battery temperature within 35 °C while keeping the temperature difference within 4 °C, showing excellent temperature control capability.
(4)
The system could preheat the battery at low ambient temperatures. Also, the numerical results indicated that the proposed contact cooling system exhibited outstanding temperature control capability and significantly reduced the pressure drop. The maximum temperature was decreased by 20.88 %, and the pressure drop was reduced by 79.78 %.
(5)
The use of deionized water as a contact cooling fluid significantly reduces the cost of the cooling system. At the same time, focusing on heat dissipation from the battery surface reduces the volume of coolant required for traditional immersion cooling, thereby decreasing the system's weight.
However, it should be noted that non-dielectric coolants may pose safety risks, which places higher demands on the system's sealing integrity. Additionally, the water resistance of the polyurethane insulation coating also needs to be improved urgently. In the future, we will conduct relevant research to address these issues.