Abstract
Range anxiety in cold climates, stemming from batteries' diminished performance at low temperatures, poses a significant barrier to the widespread adoption of electric vehicles (EVs). Battery preheating is regarded as an effective solution to address this issue. However, determining a reasonable preheating cut-off temperature is challenging due to the need to balance heating energy consumption and battery performance recovery across various environments, battery states, and vehicle power demands. This study investigates the effect of preheating cut-off temperature on battery available energy and introduces a systematic approach for determining the optimal battery preheating cut-off temperature. It also proposes a heating strategy aimed at maximizing battery energy and meeting the cold-start power needs of EVs. The results indicate that, regardless of the heating system used, the proposed strategy significantly improves EVs' driving range in low temperatures. Specifically, under the same driving conditions, implementing the proposed strategy can increase the driving range retention rate from 68.6 % to 79.5 % at −20 °C. This framework can facilitate the rapid development of optimal heating strategies for different EV battery preheating systems.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Battery preheatingCut-off temperatureLow temperatureElectric vehicle range anxiety
1. Introduction
To achieve sustainable development, electrification of transportation has become a significant direction of transformation. Among the factors involved, the electrification transformation process of road vehicles heavily relies on the continuous advancement and development of lithium-ion battery technology and its management systems [[1], [2], [3], [4]]. Currently, due to the poor performance of lithium-ion batteries in low-temperature environments, electric vehicles (EVs) experience a significant reduction in driving range during winter, which affects the user experience and poses considerable resistance to their promotion in low-temperature regions [[5], [6], [7]]. In order to mitigate the impact of low temperatures on lithium-ion battery performance, battery preheating technology has emerged and has been widely used in EVs [8].
Based on the location of the heating sources, batteries can be preheated using various methods, which mainly include external heating and internal heating [9]. External heating includes liquid heating [10,11], phase change material (PCM) heating [12,13], etc. Compared to external heating, internal heating relies on the internal resistance of batteries to warm themselves up, including bidirectional pulse heating [14,15], direct current heating [16,17], alternating current heating [18,19], self-heating batteries [20] and sandwich self-heating structures [[21], [22], [23]], etc.
Regardless of the battery preheating system in application, the purpose of battery preheating is to increase the battery temperature, thereby improving battery performance, including charging/discharging energy and available output power [24,25]. However, inevitably, the battery preheating process also requires additional energy consumption [26]. When a battery is heated from a low temperature to a relatively high temperature, its performance will gradually recover, but at the same time, the battery preheating system will consume more energy, which may result in a reduction in the output energy available for vehicle driving. If the battery is only heated to a relatively low temperature, its performance may not fully recover, and it may not even be able to output enough power to meet the vehicle's driving needs [27].
Currently, in the research field of battery preheating strategies, most researchers tend to heat the batteries to a preset fixed temperature under any operating conditions, neglecting changes in ambient temperature, the actual state of the batteries, and the specific impact of vehicle power demands on the optimal heating temperature of the batteries. For example, Guo et al. [28] proposed an echelon alternating current heating strategy and set the heating cut-off temperature at 10 °C, yet they did not provide specific reasons for such a setting. Liu et al. [29] opted to preheat the battery to 15 °C. This decision was based on the general understanding that 15 °C to 35 °C is the most suitable operating temperature range for batteries, and was also motivated by the desire to conserve heating time. On the other hand, Guo et al. [30] set the battery preheating cut-off temperature at 25 °C to avoid any potential drawbacks and achieve better battery performance. Further, both Tang et al. [31] and Ruan et al. [32] have proposed variable-frequency heating strategies, yet the target temperatures they set for battery preheating are different, specifically 0 °C and 5 °C, respectively. It can be observed that there are significant differences in the preheating cut-off temperatures set by different researchers, and these settings primarily rely on their experience and common sense. This approach lacks sufficient theoretical and experimental data support, exhibits a certain degree of arbitrariness, and thus cannot guarantee that the set heating cut-off temperatures are optimal.
Given variations in ambient temperature and battery state, the proportion of electricity consumed during battery preheating to a specific temperature, relative to its available output energy, can vary. Furthermore, EVs have different power requirements under various operating conditions [33]. Consequently, the optimal heating cut-off temperature for an EV's battery system should be adaptable, based on different ambient temperatures and battery states, rather than being a fixed and unchanging constant value [34]. Regardless of the reason for setting the heating cut-off temperature, a constant heating cut-off temperature can never meet various conditions.
Although the preheating cut-off temperature has a significant impact on the battery's discharge capability and the driving range of EVs in low-temperature environments, there is currently no definitive conclusion in the academic community regarding how to determine the optimal preheating cut-off temperature for batteries. Therefore, the preheating cut-off temperature value is often arbitrarily set based on experience.
To fill the above knowledge gaps, a thorough analysis of the specific impacts of different heating cut-off temperatures on battery available energy and heating energy consumption is first conducted, based on experimental data. On this basis, a systematic approach for determining the optimal heating cut-off temperature is proposed. This approach takes into account both the maximization of available energy and the power demand of EVs during cold-starts and is applicable to different battery preheating systems. Based on the proposed approach, the variation law of the heating cut-off temperature under different ambient temperatures, battery states, and heating system conditions is further studied. Finally, the proposed approach is applied to real-vehicle verification, and by comparing the driving range results of the heating strategy using the optimal heating cut-off temperature in low-temperature environments with the original strategy, it is proved that the proposed method for determining the optimal heating cut-off temperature has a significant effect on extending the driving range of EVs in low temperatures.
The remainder of this paper is arranged as follows: the methodology is introduced in Section 2. In Section 3, the effect of cut-off temperature is analyzed, followed by the optimal cut-off temperature MAP and its improvement of driving range. The primary conclusions are given in Section 4.
2. Methodology
2.1. Overview of the research framework
Fig. 1 illustrates the standard process framework of the proposed approach. The proposed approach comprises three parts: 1) battery experimentation and data analysis; 2) energy recovery and consumption pattern analysis; and 3) optimal cut-off temperature determination method. The specific contents will be introduced in the following sections.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (499KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the research framework.

2.2. Battery experimentation and data analysis
In step 1, three experiments are conducted to understand heating energy consumption, battery discharge energy, and output power MAP. In order to obtain the heating energy consumption pattern of the battery heating system, heating energy consumption experiment measures the electrical energy consumed by preheating system to achieve various battery temperature rises at different ambient temperatures. The battery discharge energy experiment helps us understand the energy limit that the battery can recover during the heating process from low to high temperatures. Using the data from these two experiments, the remaining available energy of the battery at different heating cut-off temperatures can be calculated. Since the battery system must also ensure vehicle driving after preheating, the battery power experiment is necessary to obtain the maximum output power that the battery can provide in different states.
To better understand the experimental part for readers, here the experimental steps and settings in detail based on the sandwich self-heating structure is introduced. Two experiments were conducted in this work: the heating energy consumption experiment and the discharge energy experiment. The battery power data was provided by the battery manufacturing company (Fig. 3 (a)). First, based on the sandwich self-heating structure proposed by our team recently, heating experiments at different temperatures were carried out to explore energy consumption. Secondly, battery discharge energy experiments at different temperatures are conducted to obtain complete battery data regarding discharge capacity and energy. The experimental battery was from MGL, and the battery parameters are shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Specifications of the battery and heating sheet.

Parameters	Value/ Material
Length (battery)	195 mm
Width (battery)	165 mm
Thickness (battery)	11 mm
Nominal capacity (battery)	48 Ah
Ohm resistance (heating sheet)	95 mΩ
Length (heating sheet)	195 mm
Width (heating sheet)	165 mm
Thickness (heating sheet)	0.1 mm
Nominal voltage	3.7 V
Mass	896 g
Anode	LiNi0.5Co0.3Mn0.2O2
Electrolyte	LiPF6
Cathode	Graphite
Heating sheet	Cu
2.2.1. Battery preheating experiments at different temperatures
(a)
Description of the battery preheating experiments
The sandwich self-heating structure is illustrated in Fig. 2 (a), consisting of several heating sheets and batteries. Owing to symmetry, the minimum unit of the sandwich self-heating structure comprises a heating sheet and two batteries. In this heating experiment, the minimum unit of the sandwich self-heating structure was utilized. The two batteries were connected in parallel and supplied power to the heating sheet. A heating switch was also connected in series within the heating loop (Fig. 2 (b)). The experimental equipment includes a temperature chamber to provide a constant ambient temperature, four T-type thermocouples for temperature collection, and a data acquisition unit capable of recording voltage, current, temperature every second. The heating energy consumption experiment was carried out at −30 °C, −25 °C, −20 °C, −15 °C, −10 °C, −5 °C and 0 °C. The experiment steps are shown in STable 1.
(b)
Battery preheating energy consumption analysis
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (442KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Battery heating experiment (a) the sandwich self-heating structure and its real photo; (b) arrangement for the heating loop and thermocouples and its real photo.

The results of the battery preheating experiments at different temperatures are shown in Fig. 3 (b). The total height of each histogram represents the electrical energy provided by the battery during the heating process. The blue part denotes the useful heat absorbed by the battery, while the yellow part represents the heat dissipated including the useless heat generated by the resistance in the circuit, the absorbed heat of components in contact with battery, and ambient heat dissipation. In order to fully demonstrate the impact of different temperature rises on heating energy consumption under different environment temperatures, all heating experiments need to be heated to the same end state, which is set to 15 °C here. When heated from −30 °C, the battery demonstrates an effective heat of 12.8 Wh, while consuming 22.4 Wh of electrical energy, resulting in a heating efficiency of 57.1 %. In the heating process from 0 °C to 15 °C, the effective heat and energy consumption are 4.48 Wh and 5.38 Wh respectively, with the heating efficiency increasing to 83.3 %. As the battery's temperature rises, the consumption of heating energy decreases, accompanied by an increase in heating efficiency.
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (234KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. (a) Battery power MAP provided by manufacture; (b) heating energy consumption experiment result of sandwich self-heating structure;

When the battery temperature rise is 0 °C, heating energy consumption is also 0 Wh, indicating that the relationship curve passes through the origin. The polynomial function is utilized to fit the relationship between heating energy consumption and battery temperature rise, as presented in Table 2.
Table 2. Energy consumption of different system and discharge energy fitting results.

Fitting function	System	Parameter value	T0	RMSE	R2
Sandwich	a1 = 0.0045, b1 = 0.2990	−30	0.0806	0.9999
a1 = 0.0054, b1 = 0.2593	−20	0.1271	0.9995
a1 = 0.0091, b1 = 0.1901	−10	0.1206	09995
Bi-pulse	a2 = 0.0186, b2 = 0.2691	−30	1.0988	0.9949
a2 = 0.0323, b2 = 0.1708	−20	1.2338	0.9934
a2 = 0.0739, b2 = 0.000	−10	0.5839	0.9984
Pulse	a3 = 0.0221, b3 = 0.2851	−30	0.3758	0.9989
a3 = 0.0519, b3 = 0.2529	−20	1.2024	0.9968
a3 = 0.0713, b3 = 0.8995	−10	0.2271	0.9998
Discharge energy	a4 = 182.7291, b4 = 52.1344, c4 = 117.6693	0.8644	0.9992
2.2.2. Battery discharge experiment at different temperatures
(a)
Description of the battery discharge experiments
The battery discharge experiment equipment consists of a battery charging and discharging system and a temperature chamber. The battery discharge experiment is conducted at −30 °C, −20 °C, −10 °C,0 °C, 10 °C, 25 °C, 35 °C and 45 °C. Battery discharge capacity and energy are calculated at each target temperature. The experiment steps are shown in STable 2.
(b)
Battery discharge capacity and energy analysis
The battery discharge voltage curves at different temperatures are shown in Fig. 4 (a). The battery discharge capacity is about 48 Ah and reaches the lower cut-off voltage of 2.5 V at an ambient temperature of 25 °C. When the temperature is 0 °C, the discharge capacity is 42 Ah. At −30 °C, the battery discharge capacity drops to 36 Ah sharply. When the ambient temperature is greater than 25 °C, the discharge capacity of the battery increases slightly. In Fig. 4 (c), the area enclosed by the voltage curve and the capacity axis is the total energy that the battery can discharge at a certain temperature. The energy that the battery can recover when heated from a low temperature to a relatively higher temperature is represented by the area difference between the voltage curves at different temperatures. Fig. 4 (d) shows the discharge capacity and energy curves of the battery at different temperatures. At −30 °C, the energy of the battery is 112.3 Wh, and when the battery temperature rises 10 °C to −20 °C, the releasable energy increases by 12.9 Wh to 125.2 Wh. However, when the battery temperature rises 10 °C from 25 °C to 35 °C, the recoverable energy is only 5.5 Wh. If the battery temperature is increased by 10 °C at different temperatures, the recoverable energy is completely different. In addition, the capacity and energy of the battery are more sensitive to low temperatures than to high temperatures. The gaussian function is used to fit the relationship between temperature and discharge energy, the fitting results are shown in Table 2.
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (222KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Battery discharge energy experiment results (a) battery discharge voltage at different temperatures; (b) battery's discharge capacity and the energy it can output at different temperatures.

2.3. Energy recovery and consumption patterns during battery preheating
In order to investigate the energy recovery and consumption patterns during the preheating process, as well as their impact on the available battery energy, the derivatives of the previously obtained battery recovery energy and heating energy consumption data with respect to temperature were plotted on the same coordinate system. Fig. 5 is the schematic diagram of energy recovery and consumption patterns when battery heating. Further, based on the Fig. 5, the relationship between battery recovery energy and heating energy consumption is analyzed.
Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (223KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Schematic diagram of the energy recovery and consumption patterns during battery preheating.

There are two curves in Fig. 5. The blue curve represents the recoverable discharge energy curve of the battery, indicating that how much battery energy can be recovered per 1 °C temperature rise at a specific temperature. The red curve represents the heating energy consumption of the battery, indicating how much electrical energy is consumed per 1 °C temperature rise at a specific temperature. Under a certain ambient temperature, the larger the battery temperature rise due to heating, the higher the energy consumption is. By plotting those two curves, the relationship between the battery recoverable energy and heating energy consumption at different cold-start temperatures can be obtained.
The area enclosed by the blue curve and X-axis represents the recovered energy during heating process. The area enclosed by the red curve and X-axis represents the energy consumption during heating process. The difference between these two areas is the change of battery available energy. The blue curve and the red curve intersect at b, which is the maximum battery available energy point. When heating cut-off temperature decreases, for example a, though the recoverable energy and heating energy consumption decrease at the same time, the change of available energy is still positive but less than b. When heating cut-off temperature increases, for example c, the change of available energy is also less than b. The cut-off temperature at b can achieve the maximum battery available energy because at this temperature, the change of available energy is positive and maximum.
In order to verify that different heating systems have similar patterns, based on fitting function in Table 2, the recoverable energy and heating energy consumption of sandwich self-heating structure, bidirectional pulse heating system and the pulse heating system [[35], [36], [37]] is shown in Fig. 6. And the recoverable energy curves at different SOE states are plotted together. Bidirectional pulse heating uses two batteries to charge and discharge each other in a short period to form a bidirectional current pulse to heat the battery. Pulse heating uses a small resistor in series with the battery to generate heat by the battery's own pulse discharge current.
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (761KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Recoverable discharge energy curve and heating energy consumption curve: (a)-(c) Tcst = −30 °C, sandwich self-heating, bidirectional pulse heating, pulse heating. (d)-(f) Tcst = −20 °C, sandwich self-heating, bidirectional pulse heating, pulse heating. (g)-(i) Tcst = −10 °C, sandwich self-heating, bidirectional pulse heating, pulse heating.

Based on the previous analysis, the cut-off temperature of maximum available energy can be easily obtained. Due to the different heating energy consumption, the heating energy consumption curves of three heating systems are also different, resulting in different heating cut-off temperatures. But in general, different heating systems all have a heating cut-off temperature of maximum available energy. This temperature value is affected by the battery energy state, the relationship between battery discharge energy and temperature, and the energy consumption of the heating system. The energy consumption of the heating system is mainly affected by the heating efficiency. Currently, heating efficiency of bidirectional pulse heating systems and pulse heating systems in reference is 30 to 40 % on average [35,36], while the heating efficiency of the sandwich self-heating structure is about 60 % to 80 % on average.
2.4. Method for determining the optimal battery preheating cut-off temperature
In step 3, while considering the battery power and energy after heating at the same time, the four stages that the battery undergoes during the preheating process are first analyzed in detail. Based on this analysis, an optimal preheating cut-off temperature strategy is proposed. This strategy is based on an iterative algorithm, aimed at ensuring that the available energy of the battery is maximized and the battery can output the required power after preheating. If the battery's SOE or the ambient temperature is too low to achieve a successful cold start, the strategy issues a warning.
(a)
Four stages in the preheating process when considering energy and power
As shown in Fig. 7, from cold-start, the battery will go through four stages during the preheating process.
Fig. 7
Download: Download high-res image (255KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Schematic diagram of cold-start state and four stages during preheating process.

The first stage is the insufficient heating stage, where the available energy of the battery increases slightly, but the battery temperature is still low. As the heating progresses, the available energy of the battery continues to rise, reaching its maximum at the suitable heating point. If the preheating continues further, the battery enters the excessive heating stage, where the available energy begins to decrease, but it is still higher than the original cold-start state. After further heating, the battery's available energy begins to be lower than the cold-start state, entering the over-limit heating stage.
In actual application, EVs operating in low temperatures require the battery system to provide basic starting power for the drive system to overcome road friction. In order to overcome tire resistance during vehicle driving, based on vehicle dynamics, the minimum required driving force after cold start can be calculated. Furthermore, by motor MAP and minimum required driving force, the basic power output demand can be calculated that the battery provides to the motor for vehicle driving after the cold start process. For different types of vehicles and powertrain systems, the calculation of demand power provided by battery systems may also be slightly different. Compared to electric passenger cars, electric trucks and buses generally require an additional gearbox in their powertrain due to their large mass [[38], [39], [40]]. But at the battery cell level, this all means that after the battery utilizes its heating system to increase temperature, it needs to be able to output a basic power to satisfy vehicle driving requirements.
When the power demand is further considered, a power-SOE boundary appears during the heating process. Only when the battery state is within this boundary can the power demand be met. If the battery is heated to the position of the first five-pointed star, the battery state is outside the power boundary, resulting in a battery cold-start failure. As long as the battery energy is sufficient, this situation must not occur during heating. The second five-pointed star represents the most ideal strategy point, which can not only meet the power demand but also achieve the maximum available energy. At the state of the third five-pointed star, although the available energy has decreased, it is still improved compared to the initial state, and the power demand can be met. In some cases, this heating cut-off temperature is also acceptable. At the state of the fourth star, the target power can also be met, but the available energy is already lower than the initial state. This heating cut-off temperature should also be avoided as much as possible during the heating process, unless the power boundary is very tight and the energy maximization point is outside the feasible power bound.
(b)
Optimal heating cut-off strategy
Because the SOE, output power, and temperature of the battery change during the heating process, the following calculation process and pseudocode of strategy algorithm are proposed based on the battery power MAP in Fig. 3 (a), to obtain the optimal preheating cut-off temperature (Fig. 8). The code is open sourced at support files.
Fig. 8
Download: Download high-res image (846KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Calculation process for optimal heating cut-off temperature and pseudocode of strategy algorithm.

First, the minimum heating temperature and corresponding energy consumption that meet the power demand are calculated, which is the Tpower in the pseudocode. If the heating energy consumption exceeds the maximum dischargeable energy at the current battery status, it indicates that the battery will be unable to fulfill the future starting power demand, whether it is heated or not. Here, we define that the battery enters the cold-starting dead zone and the cold-start process fails.
Second, the feasible heating scope under the power demand, based on the present battery status, is calculated, and the heating cut-off temperature that maximizes the remaining battery energy within this range is obtained (Tenergy in pseudocode).
Third, the heating energy consumption corresponding to the cut-off temperature and the battery status after heating are calculated. If it meets the power demand, the cut-off temperature will be output. Otherwise, return to step 1 and recalculate based on the updated battery status obtained in step 3.
Based on all the battery cold-start states and the proposed strategy, the optimal heating cut-off temperature MAP of the battery system can be obtained for different battery SOEs and temperatures. Thus, at any ambient temperature and battery SOE state, as long as the battery system needs to be preheated, the corresponding optimal heating cut-off temperature can be quickly obtained using the MAP.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Effect of heating cut-off temperature on battery available energy
In the previous section, the effect of heating cut-off temperature on heating energy consumption and energy recovery is examined. To further explore the impact of heating cut-off temperature on the battery's available energy after heating with different heating systems, the battery's available energy at various heating cut-off temperatures are plotted under the same cold-start conditions for different heating systems in Fig. 9. Different colors represent different cold start temperatures, and different line types represent different initial SOE.
Fig. 9
Download: Download high-res image (560KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Available battery energy for (a) sandwich self-heating structure, (b) bidirectional pulse heating system, and (c) pulse heating system.

Fig. 9 (a) shows the change in available energy of the sandwich self-heating structure with different heating cut-off temperatures. When the SOE is 100 % and the cold-start temperature (Tcst) is −30 °C, the maximum available energy can reach 140 Wh. When the cold-start temperature rises to −10 °C, this value reaches 155 Wh. Due to the different energy consumption curves of different heating systems, the specific values of each available energy curve are slightly different. The maximum available energy of bidirectional pulse heating and pulse heating is around 0 °C. This is reasonable, so as others have studied, 0 °C is the turning point at which battery impedance changes become insensitive to temperature [41]. Because the pulse heating system and bidirectional pulse heating system mainly rely on the internal resistance of the battery to generate heat, and when the cold-start temperature is not so low, the heating efficiency decreases.
But the changing trend of all available energy curves is basically the same. Regardless of the heating system or the cold-start status, as the heating cut-off temperature increases, the battery available energy first increases and then decreases. There is a heating cut-off temperature at which the battery available energy is maximized.
3.2. Analysis of the optimal cut-off temperature MAP
Based on the optimal heating cut-off temperature determination approach proposed in Section 2, by inputting different cold-start statuses, including different temperatures and SOEs, the optimal heating cut-off temperature MAP considering energy maximum and power demand is obtained. In addition, to verify the effectiveness of proposed method in different heating systems, the optimal heating cut-off temperature MAPs with different heating systems are also shown here.
3.2.1. Optimal cut-off temperature MAP analysis with different power demands
Fig. 10 shows the heating cut-off temperature to maximize dischargeable energy under different power demands and the increased battery energy after heating. Fig. 10 (a) and (c) show the heating cut-off temperature under different power demands, where the white area is the dead zone. Dead zone means when the battery status is in dead zone, it cannot meet the power demand by heating itself without external energy. Under 200 W power demand, the battery dead zone is the smallest. At −30 °C, when the SOE is about 18 %, battery has already entered dead zone. At 0 °C, when the SOE is 10 %, the battery enters dead zone. At −30 °C, the battery enters the dead zone at 23 % SOE under 300 W power demand. The power demand of the battery increases thus the battery dead zone range increases significantly. When the battery cold-start temperature and battery energy are both relatively high, the proposed strategy tends to heat the battery to recover energy as much as possible, otherwise, the heating cut-off temperature is low. However, when the battery SOE is too low, the strategy needs to heat the battery to a higher temperature to meet the power demand. For example, at −30 °C ambient temperature, when SOE is 100 % and 20 %, the heating cut-off temperatures are around 20 °C and 5 °C respectively, which are significantly higher than −5 °C of 40 % SOE.
Fig. 10
Download: Download high-res image (539KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 10. (a) sandwich self-heating structure heating cut-off temperature with 200 W power demand; (b) sandwich self-heating structure increased energy with 200 W power demand; (c) sandwich self-heating structure heating cut-off temperature with 300 W power demand; (d) sandwich self-heating structure increased energy with 300 W power demand.

Fig. 10 (b) and (d) show the increased battery energy during the heating process. The red line is the boundary where the increased energy is 0 Wh. This means that when the battery state is on this line, the recovered battery energy and heating consumption energy are completely offset causing the increased energy to be 0 Wh. When the battery status is between this red boundary and the dead zone boundary, it means that due to the low SOE, the battery needs to be heated to a higher temperature in order to meet the power demand to break through the power limitation from low temperature, resulting in more battery consumption energy and negative increased energy in Fig. 10.
In conclusion, these two curves divide the battery status into three zones. In the first zone, the battery can not only meet the power demand but also increase the available battery energy after heating. In the second zone, the battery can only meet the power demand and the available battery energy decreases. In the third zone, the battery preheating cannot meet the power demand, which means the battery enters the dead zone and the vehicle cannot be started.
At −30 °C and 100 % SOE, when utilizing sandwich self-heating structure, the battery will be heated to around 21 °C with 200 W power demand. Before heating, the battery system can discharge about 112 Wh energy. After heating, removing the heating energy consumption of about 27 Wh, the battery can still discharge about 143 Wh energy. Available energy increases 31 Wh. It can be seen that if the proposed strategy is used in EVs, this will increase the low-temperature driving range by a considerable amount. In fact, as long as the complete data of the battery used in EVs is obtained, the suitable heating cut-off temperature can be quickly obtained through the table lookup method as shown in Fig. 10.
3.2.2. Optimal cut-off temperature MAP analysis with different heating systems
The heating cut-off temperature of bidirectional pulse heating systems and pulse heating systems are shown in Fig. 11 (a) and (c). Due to the increase in heating energy consumption, the dead zone of the bidirectional pulse and pulse heating strategies are larger than the sandwich self-heating structure. This phenomenon is caused by the low-frequency current pulse applied here and higher frequency current pulse effect may be better [15]. When the power demand is 300 W and the cold-start temperature is −30 °C, the cut-off temperature of bidirectional heating is −5 °C. Before heating, the battery system can discharge about 112 Wh energy. After heating, removing the heating energy consumption of about 18 Wh, the battery can still discharge about 126 Wh energy. Available energy increases 14 Wh. This value is 12 Wh when pulse heating is used. Similar to the sandwich self-heating structure, the heating cut-off temperature of the bidirectional pulse and the pulse heating systems shows the same trend. At high SOE and low SOE, battery is heated to a higher temperature for energy maximization or power demand, respectively.
Fig. 11
Download: Download high-res image (481KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 11. (a) bidirectional pulse heating cut-off temperature with 400 W power demand; (b) bidirectional pulse heating increased energy with 400 W power demand; (c) pulse heating cut-off temperature with 400 W power demand; (d) pulse heating increased energy with 400 W power demand.

In Fig. 11 (b) and (d), the second zone of bidirectional pulse heating system and pulse heating system, where the battery can only meet the power demand and the available battery energy decreases, is also different due to the different energy consumption curves.
Overall, for different heating systems, the proposed methods can increase the battery available energy at low temperatures by varying the optimal heating cut-off temperature in different conditions while ensuring power output, which prove that our strategy has the potential to be generalized in different heating systems.
3.3. Effect of heating cut-off strategy on EV driving range
Based on an actual EV, the low-temperature driving range with different heating strategies are simulated and compared. The simulation platform is MATLAB 2020a/Simulink. Based on the longitudinal dynamics of the vehicle, an electric vehicle model is established, including a driver model, vehicle model, motor model and battery model. After inputting the driving cycle curves, the vehicle dynamics model and motor model will output a real-time power curve for the battery system. The power curve is inputted to the battery model to simulate the driving range. The entire simulation continues until the battery system reaches cut-off voltage, and the driving range of the entire process is recorded. The ambient temperature is set as the battery cold start temperature of every case to simulate, the vehicle is left outdoors for a long time and needs to be driving. The vehicle model is shown in SFig. 1.
Three strategies are compared in this work, namely, the strategy proposed in this paper, the constant cut-off strategy, and the strategy that only considers the starting power (Fig. 13). The constant cut-off strategy is to set a fixed and constant cut-off temperature in advance, regardless of the environment, always preheat the battery to this temperature (Fig. 12 (b)). The strategy that only considers the starting power is to preheat the battery to the power that can output enough power for the vehicle driving system (Fig. 12 (c)). The comparison results are shown in Fig. 13 and the specifications of the EV are shown in Table 3.
Fig. 12
Download: Download high-res image (602KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 12. Schematic diagram of heating cut-off temperature strategy (a) optimal cut-off temperature strategy (b) constant cut-off temperature strategy (c) Only considering power cut-off temperature strategy.

Fig. 13
Download: Download high-res image (390KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 13. Comparison results of three preheat strategies (a) driving range in low temperatures (b) preheat cut-off temperature.

Table 3. Specifications of the electric vehicle.

Parameters	Value
Vehicle mass/kg	2029
Battery system voltage/V	360
Battery system energy/kWh	70
Battery connection	4P102S
Vehicle start power demand/kW	100
Peek motor power/kW	210
Peek motor torque/Nm	400
Drag coefficient	0.24
Frontal area/m2	2.2
Vehicle dimension/mm	4872 × 1846 × 1481
Driving range/km (China Light Vehicle Test Cycle)	526
Actual driving range/km	490
Actual driving range in winter/km
(−20 °C ∼ 10 °C)	264–423
Under the four conditions, the driving range of the proposed strategy is the highest. When based on sandwich self-heating structure with −20 °C cold-start temperature and 100 % SOE, the proposed strategy achieves driving range of 418 km, while the constant cut-off temperature strategy and the strategy that only considers power demand is only 361 km and 260 km, which are improved by 16 % and 61 %, respectively. When the initial SOE drops to 60 %, the driving range drops significantly, but the proposed strategy can still improve it by 9 % and 45 %, respectively. Because in both cases, the battery energy is relatively sufficient, the battery system can heat the battery to a high temperature and fully recover the battery performance, while the constant cut-off temperature strategy has a limited effect (Fig. 13 (b)). Although the bidirectional pulse heating system and pulse heating systems have limitations in heating efficiency, the low-temperature driving range improvement is also very effective with proposed strategy. When the ambient temperature is −30 °C, and 80 % initial SOE, based on pulse heating system, the proposed strategy can improve the driving range by 8 % and 38 % respectively compared with other strategies reaching 219 km. When the ambient temperature is −30 °C, 80 % initial SOE, based on bidirectional pulse heating system, the driving range of the proposed strategy and the constant cut-off temperature strategy both reach 245 km, which is higher than the strategy that only considers power demand.
Compared to the constant heating cut-off strategy, the proposed strategy can always ensure that the battery available energy is maximum, thereby significantly improving the vehicle's driving range in all cases. When the battery condition becomes severe, the proposed strategy also degenerates into only considering power strategy to avoid cold-start failures.
4. Conclusions
Based on actual EV needs, this paper proposes a systematic approach for determining the optimal battery preheating cut-off temperature that maximizes the available battery energy and meets the power demands for EV low-temperature cold-start. The contributions and important findings can be summarized below:
(1)
The effect of heating cut-off temperature on battery available energy under different cold-start temperatures and battery states is explored. Regardless of the heating system, as the heating cut-off temperature increases, the battery available energy increases and then decreases. During the heating process, there is a heating cut-off temperature that achieves the maximum available battery energy.
(2)
Since actual EV cold-starts have certain power demands on the battery system, this paper proposes a heating strategy that can maximize the battery available energy while meeting different power demands from cold-start at the same time. Based on the proposed strategy, the optimal heating cut-off temperature at different conditions is obtained. The proposed strategy can improve the available battery energy with different heating systems and various states. And when the battery energy and ambient temperature are too low, the EV fails to start cold and the battery enters the dead zone, where the EV cannot be started by the vehicle's battery system and heating system. Due to the different heating energy consumption and heat generation mechanisms, the heating cut-off temperatures and dead zone boundaries of the three heating systems are different.
(3)
This strategy is further applied for obtaining driving range results. At different driving conditions, three heating strategies are compared. The results show that the proposed strategy has an obvious improvement in the driving range under all conditions, which can be improved by up to 16 % compared with the constant cut-off temperature strategy.
The proposed approach can quickly obtain the optimal heating cut-off temperature with different heating systems, indicating that it has the potential for generalization to different vehicles operating in low temperatures and provides guidance for developing future battery preheating strategies.
5. Future discussions and limitations
At present, how to set the optimal heating cut-off temperature during the vehicle cold start process to ensure the low-temperature performance of the vehicle and battery system is discussed in this work. Any heating system that obtains its energy consumption curve can directly use our method to obtain the optimal heating cut-off temperature. Heating systems discussed in this article apply low-frequency current, high-frequency current heating systems may obtain better results due to the skin effect. Moreover, for dynamic driving processes at low temperatures, how to utilize battery thermal management systems including heating and cooling, to accurately, actively and effectively adjust battery temperature dynamically meeting the different driving needs of vehicles remains a challenge. For example, short driving journeys at low temperatures or long driving journeys with an additional fast charge require completely different battery thermal management strategies. For a short journey at low temperatures, it is not necessary to simply increase lots of low-temperature driving range by heating, because this only wastes the driver's low-temperature cold start time. For a long journey, a fast charge may be required during the process. At this time, if the battery is heated to a very high temperature, it is likely to cause the battery temperature to be too high during the fast charging process, and additional energy is required to further cool the battery, wasting more energy. Therefore, how to set a reasonable battery thermal management strategy for low-temperature dynamic driving processes needs further research, which is our future work.