Abstract
In Antarctic air drilling, borehole stability critically depends on heat transfer between ice walls and airflow, the ice sheet temperature gradient, and air's non-isothermal flow. Effective mitigation of thermally induced borehole collapse/closure risks in Antarctic air drilling necessitates understanding the aero-thermo-mechanical (ATM) coupling effect in Antarctic air drilling systems. This paper presents a coupled ATM model, which incorporates a Helmholtz energy thermodynamic model for air and the equation of state for H2O Ice Ih revised by IAPWS (the International Association for the Properties of Water and Steam), characterizing real thermodynamic behavior and properties of air and ice. And three failure indices are modified to account for temperature sensitivity and compared with the Derradji-Aouat failure index. They are used to quantify high-strain-rate brittle failure risks from the perspective of tension, shear, and phase transition. Ice deformation under low strain rates is governed by the Maxwell model. Numerical solutions derived from U.S. RAM-2 drilling parameters via finite element methods reveal key findings: As airflow transitions from the drill hose into the annulus through a “transition zone,” it exhibits abrupt property changes. The ATM coupling effect creates localized regions along the ice wall with steep temperature gradients (ΔT ≈ 20 K) and stress fluctuations (Δσ ≈ 0.01 MPa). Extreme transitions in these regions increase closure or collapse risks, primarily due to tensile failure. Lowering the temperature of the injected air can effectively reduce tensile failure risks. This paper proposes an operational control process to achieve this.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Ice drillingAir direct circulationBorehole stabilityAero-thermo-mechanical modellingFailure criteriaThermodynamic behaviorThermo-mechanical response
1. Introduction
The measurement and sampling of the Antarctic ice sheet and its subglacial environment are foundational components of Antarctic glacial research. Antarctic drilling is the most direct approach to achieve this (Zhang et al., 2020). However, due to severe environmental restrictions, drilling in the Antarctic requires very little biological disruption while in operation.
Air drilling has been shown to have a high rate of penetration, which can effectively improve the drilling efficiency. As an underbalanced drilling technique, it can effectively prevent circulation losses, only requiring casing at the permeable snow-firn zone during drilling. Additionally, air drilling has the advantage of being pollution-free, making it particularly suitable for Antarctic operations.
Nevertheless, borehole stability remains a challenge in Antarctic air drilling. A previous survey (Derradji and Evgin, 2001) found that strain rate dependency is present in ice failure modes. Under a low strain rate, ice behaves as a nonlinear elastic material with progressive damage propagation that depends on temperature and time. Under a high strain rate (>10−3/s), it acts as a linear elastic material with a brittle mode of failure. As an unbalanced drilling technique, air drilling may lead to borehole collapse or closure due to insufficient hydrostatic pressure support. Both failure modes are affected by the ice temperature (Li et al., 2024). Therefore, the shape and characteristics of the ice wall are influenced by the thermal effects of air drilling (Dharma-Wardana, 1983; Park et al., 2021; Jain and Singh, 2024). There are two primary aspects: First, during drilling, heat transfer between the continuously circulating air and the ice wall affects the borehole's stability. In practice, the impact of heat exchange behavior is frequently reduced by injecting ethanol and cooling compressed air, mitigating the risk of refreezing water vapor or preventing ice melting. However, Antarctic ice sheet surface temperatures typically range from - 60 °C to −30 °C, while the currently operational RAM-2 drill can only cool compressed air to approximately −10 °C (Talalay et al., 2020; Gibson et al., 2021). It is impossible to prevent the heat exchange behavior between the ice wall and the air. The second is the ice sheet's inherent temperature gradient. According to a related study (Talalay et al., 2020), the temperature of the Antarctic ice sheet increases with vertical depth, further affecting the borehole stability.
Establishing a coupled aero-thermo-mechanical model of Antarctic air drilling is therefore essential. The ATM models have consistently been a significant subject in engineering studies. For various issues in various domains, various aero-thermo-mechanical models have been put forth. In 2009, J.W. Chew reviewed advances and prospects for large-scale computational fluid dynamics (CFD) modelling in aeroengine design (Chew and Hills, 2009). In the same year, Zhu Wancheng added the rock damage process to the coupled TGM model. The TGM model in the process of rock damage was developed with consideration to account for the interaction between multiple physical fields and rock damage (Zhu et al., 2009). In 2012, Amirante D et al. improved the mesh deformation method for the TGM model of a turbine-engine (Amirante et al., 2012). In the same year, Yuanming Lai et al. designed a coupled TGM model of frost soil to model its freezing and simulated the ice-water phase transition using the Clapeyron equation (Lai et al., 2014). In 2017, Sabrina Giuntini et al. developed a predicting method for gas turbine metal temperatures. This method uses axisymmetric transient finite elements and is based on a 2D coupled aero-thermo-mechanical model (Sabrina Giuntini, 2017). In the same year, Ognjen et al. established an aero-thermo-mechanical study for the supersonic flight missile's fin-type structure (Ognjanovic et al., 2017). Zhixue Sun et al. developed a THM model for geothermal systems based on their investigation of heat exchange behavior between fluids and fractures. They proposed and validated a numerical technique to simulate and analyze heat extraction processes in Enhanced Geothermal Systems (EGS) (Sun et al., 2017). Jun Yao created a 3D stochastic THM-EGS model based on local thermal equilibrium theory, using it to predict and evaluate the situation of a Desert Peak geothermal reservoir (Yao et al., 2018). In 2019, Fan presented an improved coupled thermal-gas-mechanical model for coalbed methane recovery. This model was designed to investigate the complex relationships between coal deformation, mass transport of two-phase flow, and ternary gas (CH₄/CO₂/N₂) co-adsorption on coals. (Fan et al., 2019). In the same year, Xu Zhengming described the thermodynamic state, behavior, and characteristics of carbon using the Helmholtz explicit free energy equation. Additionally, the three-phase flow law of deep high-temperature and high-pressure wells was discovered through the establishment of an ATM model of deep drilling (Zhengming, 2019). Dariusz Gawin presents a new hygro-thermal model for the porous material saturated with water (Gawin et al., 2019). In 2020, Wu Di established an ATM model of compressed air energy storage caverns. Assuming air had isotropic characteristics, the model considered the time-varying impacts of air temperature and pressure on salt-cavern stability (Di, 2020). In 2022, Lyu conducted a THM triaxial compression and permeability experiment on salt rock. It revealed how salt rock properties vary under different temperatures (Lyu et al., 2022). In 2023, WenJing Li introduced the Helmholtz free energy explicit equation into the salt caverns ATM model for underground gas storage. This equation describes carbon's thermodynamic state, behavior, and properties, making it closer to real gas (Li et al., 2023). In 2024, Emad Norouzi and Biao Li present a THM model for unsaturated freezing soils and a new soil freezing characteristic curve model, incorporating both water-ice suction effects and air-water capillary pressure (Norouzi and Li, 2024).
However, due to the particularity of Antarctic air drilling, THM coupling experiences from other fields can't be fully applied to Antarctic air drilling. It's necessary to specialize in the thermodynamic properties of the air and the ice wall.
This study develops a coupled ATM model for Antarctic air drilling (See Fig. 1). It incorporates a Helmholtz energy thermodynamic model for air (Lemmon et al., 2000a, Lemmon et al., 2000b; Estela-Uribe, 2006) and the equation of state for H2O Ice Ih revised by IAPWS (Feistel and Wagner, 2006; Feistel, 2009). The aim is to investigate the thermodynamic properties of actual air during operation as well as the distribution features of temperature and stress fields in the ice wall. Finally, the influence of the time-varying temperature effect on ice borehole stability is revealed. Three failure indices are modified to account for temperature sensitivity. Based on that, a production control process is suggested.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (262KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Antarctic air drill (ice sheet temperature profile data from Talalay et al., 2020).

2. ATM modelling and numerical method for Antarctic air drilling
The coupled aero-thermo-mechanical process of Antarctic air drilling is shown in Fig. 2. To simplify the process, the following assumptions are adopted:
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (205KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Coupling relationships of the ATM model for Antarctic air drilling.

(1) The effects of ice chips on airflow and heat transfer during penetration are neglected.
According to related studies, the sizes of cuttings in air drilling are typically small, within the millimeter range. At this stage, gravity has a negligible impact on cutting movement; instead, cuttings and air are thought to form a homogeneous mixture and can be treated as a single phase (Li et al., 2013; Hong et al., 2015). Given their small surface area, ice cuttings have low heat transfer efficiency with air and minimally affect air temperature. For computational efficiency, the influence of ice cuttings is thus neglected.
(2) In engineering practice, ice walls melt locally and sparsely. Therefore, this study considers latent heat effects from ice-water phase transitions on heat transfer yet ignores the geometric deformation of the melting ice.
According to research on electro-thermal drilling probes for glacier-ice exploration (Grilli et al., 2014; Park et al., 2021), during normal drilling operations, the thin liquid layer produced on the ice wall is usually less than 1 mm thick. For normal air drilling, which has a lower heat transfer efficiency than electro-thermal drilling, the liquid layer should be much thinner than 1 mm. Therefore, ice wall melting in normal air drilling is very limited, with minimal water production. Consequently, melting has a minimal impact on air flow and ice wall geometry. Besides, during abnormal drilling with extensive ice wall melting, well closure is almost unavoidable, making further analysis unnecessary. Thus, for computational efficiency, the study ignores the impact of ice wall melting on geometry.
(3) Heat transfer between the drill hose and air is neglected. The drill hose is assumed to be a thermal insulator.
According to relevant material (Bar-Cohen and Zacny, 2006), thermoplastic hoses are commonly used in Antarctic drilling fluid drilling operations, which have poor thermal conductivity. Given that air also has weak thermal conductivity, heat transfer between the drilling hose and air is minimal. Under these conditions, the drilling hose can be treated as a thermal insulator.
2.1. Control equation for ATM model of Antarctic air drill
The thermodynamic properties of air are critical to developing an ATM model for the Antarctic air drilling system. As a compressible gas, air experiences significant variations in density, viscosity, and temperature during annular flow (Jacobsen et al., 1990). Its thermodynamic behavior is governed by the Navier-Stokes equation, continuity equation, and energy conservation equation. The Navier-Stokes equation and continuity equation describe the mass transfer of air in the Antarctic air drilling system, while the energy conservation equation describes the heat transfer of air in the Antarctic air drilling system. Adopting the k-ε turbulence model to solve the effective turbulent viscosity, which only requires a small amount of calculation and is accurate. Governing equations are provided in Eq. (1).
(1)
where U is the velocity vector; I is the unit matrix; P is the air pressure; Cp is the specific isobaric heat capacity of air; η is the dynamic viscosity of air; λ is the thermal conductivity of air; ρ is air density, whose unit is kg/m3 for dynamics and mol L−1 in thermodynamic state, and air's molar mass M = 0.2897 kg mol−1; T is the air temperature; qr is the radiation heat flux vector of air; Qair-other is other heat terms for air; α is the Helmholtz free energy; δ = ρ/ρj, τ = Tj/T, ρj and Tj are the density and temperature of air at the maximum temperature point, ρj = 10.447 mol L−1, Tj = 132 K.
Since air is not an ideal gas under drilling conditions, a Helmholtz energy thermodynamic model is employed to characterize its thermodynamic state and properties. The Helmholtz energy thermodynamic model is a kind of equation of state that has been proved to have high precision, and all essential thermodynamic properties can be obtained by its derived formula (Meng et al., 2008). It covers thermodynamic states from 59.7 K (freezing point) to 2000 K, with pressures up to 2000 MPa. For conditions exceeding 873 K and 70 MPa, nitrogen data supplements air property calculations due to experimental limitations (Lemmon et al., 2000a, Lemmon et al., 2000b). Air properties are presented in Table 1.
Table 1. Air properties.

Parameter	formula
Density	
Specific isothermal heat capacity	
Specific isobaric heat capacity	
Viscosity	
Thermal conductivity	
Where R is the ideal gas constant; Cv is the specific isothermal heat capacity of air; details of the use of the polynomials of σ, τ to calculate the Helmholtz free energy Eric gave in Lemmon's paper (Lemmon et al., 2000a, Lemmon et al., 2000b); the details of the calculation of air viscosity and thermal conductivity using the polynomials of σ and τ can be seen in Lemmon's paper (Lemmon and Jacobsen, 2004).
Another crucial component of the ATM model of Antarctic air drilling is the description of the thermodynamic properties of ice. This study focuses on the thermodynamic interaction between the ice zone of the Antarctic ice sheet and air. Below the snow-firn zone, the ice has low porosity and low permeability and densifies. The pores of ice have closed off and no longer interconnect. With the depth increases, the pores decrease, and the pores of ice become smaller. Until a certain depth is reached, the pores disappear (Bar-Cohen and Zacny, 2006; Talalay, 2016). Moreover, data on the porosity and permeability of Antarctic ice sheets remains unavailable, with only approximate data on density variation with depth. Besides, as an underbalanced drilling, air drilling provides air pressure, which is lower than the borehole stress. Except for the snow-firn zone, fluid loss to the formation is unlikely to occur during air drilling.
Therefore, the ice and its pore meltwater are treated as a whole “ice” whose density is controlled by temperature and pressure, without using porosity and permeability. The heat transfer in ice is governed by a transient solid heat transfer equation. This equation includes heat conduction, heat radiation, and thermal expansion terms. The elastic-plastic deformation of ice at a low strain rate can be depicted using the Maxwell model. Eq. (2) illustrates the control equations:
(2)
where Pice is the ice stress; Cp-ice is the isobaric heat capacity of ice; Uice is the translation speed of ice; Sice is the second stress tensor of ice; Qice-other is other heat terms for ice; αice is the coefficient of bulk expansion for ice; qice is the conduction heat flux vector of ice, qr-ice is the radiation heat flux vector of ice; ρice is the ice density; σ is the total stress tensor; σ0 is the initial stress tensor; Dice is the elastic modulus of ice; ηice is the viscosity of ice; ε is the total strain tensor; εel is the strain tensor; εth is the thermal strain tensor; εtv is the thermal viscosity tensor; gice is the Gibbs free energy.
During drilling, ice properties vary due to air pressure and heat transfer (Dharma-Wardana, 1983; Park et al., 2021; Jain and Singh, 2024). The thermodynamic state and properties of ice can be described by the equation of state for H2O Ice Ih revised by IAPWS, which is a high-precision and highly derivative equation of state (Feistel and Wagner, 2006). According to the equation of state for H2O Ice Ih, the thermodynamic properties of the ice wall can be obtained in Table 2.
Table 2. Ice properties.

Parameter	formula
Density	
Isobaric heat capacity	
Cubic expansion coefficient	
Isothermal compressibility	
Where the specific details of the calculation of the dimensionless Gibbs free energy using the polynomials of Tice and Pice can be seen in Feistel’ paper (Feistel and Wagner, 2006).
2.2. Ice failure indices
Ice failure modes exhibit strain rate dependency. Under a low strain rate, ice behaves as a nonlinear elastic material with progressive damage propagation that depends on temperature and time. A progressive damage model is used to model the behavior of ice at low strain rates(Derradji and Evgin, 2001), with the governing equation of elastoplastic deformation at low strain rate is shown in Eq. (2). This paper addresses the ductile deformation of ice by considering the impact of temperature on its viscosity.
According to the research (Li et al., 2024), the ice temperature will not only affect the ductile deformation of the ice but also affect the brittle failure of the ice.
Under a high strain rate (>10−3/s), it acts as a linear elastic material with a brittle mode of failure. In terms of brittle failure, because different failure criteria consider different factors, the influence of temperature on each strength criterion is various.
The brittle failure of ice under high strain rate can be described by the maximum tensile stress theory, the Mogi-Coulomb failure criterion, the Teardrop failure criterion, and the Derradji-Aouat failure criterion (Zhang et al., 2018; Wang, 2024). The maximum tensile stress theory considers the tensile failure of the borehole, while the Mogi-Coulomb failure criterion considers the shear failure of the borehole. The Teardrop failure criterion considers the possible failure caused by ice phase transition pressure. As for the Derradji-Aouat failure criterion, it's a multi-curved brittle failure criterion, which is associated with the absolute maximum octahedral shear stress of ice and is based on freshwater triaxial compression test data.
It can be seen from the research (Fish and Zaretsky, 1997; Derradji-Aouat, 2003; Wagner et al., 2011; Hongbiao, 2016) that ice tensile strength, ice phase transition pressure, internal friction angle cohesion, the absolute maximum octahedral shear stress of ice, and hydrostatic pressure are all temperature-dependent. However, among the above failure criteria, only the Derradji-Aouat failure criterion considers the effect of temperature on the octahedral shear stress.
To better reflect the influence of temperature on the stability of ice walls and properly describe the ice's brittle collapse, it is necessary to modify the failure criteria except for the Derradji-Aouat failure criterion.
The Mogi-Coulomb failure criterion is an extension of the Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion. Like the Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion, it uses the internal friction angle and cohesion to calculate the shear strength of boreholes. Moreover, it also considers the strengthening impact of the intermediate stress and possible borehole fractures or slips. Based on Anatoly M.Fish’ s law of friction angle and cohesion in ice varying with temperature (Fish and Zaretsky, 1997), the Mogi-Coulomb failure criterion is modified. Finally, the shear failure index obtained is Eq. (3):
(3)
where σ1, σ2, σ3 are principal stresses; τ is the shear force; τoct is the shear strength; α and β are the fitting parameters obtained from the experiment. α = 9.61, β = 4.69; s0-ice and φ0-ice are the cohesion and internal friction angle of ice at 0 °C, s0-ice is taken as 5.37 MPa, φ0-ice is taken as 0.04; Tmelt is the melting temperature of ice.
The Teardrop failure criterion is based on ice melting pressure and ice tensile strength. Research findings indicate that the ice melting pressure and tensile strength of ice are influenced by temperature (Wagner et al., 2011; Hongbiao, 2016). Therefore, the Teardrop failure criterion can be modified to enhance its suitability for evaluating the brittle failure of ice. In this paper, the modification uses IWPS's established relationship between ice melting pressure and temperature, as well as Zhang Hongbiao's empirical relations for the temperature dependence of ice tensile strength (Wagner et al., 2011; Hongbiao, 2016). Finally, the phase transition failure index can be derived as Eq. (4):
(4)
where ai and bi are the fitting parameters obtained from the experiment; p⁎ and T⁎ are the temperature and pressure values at the gas-liquid-gas-solid three-point, P⁎ = 611.657 Pa, T⁎ = 273.16 K; σt-ice is the tensile strength of ice.
The maximum tensile stress theory considers the tensile failure of boreholes. It is based on the minimum principal stress and tensile strength. According to Zhang Hongbiao's variation laws of temperature-dependent tensile strength (Hongbiao, 2016), the tensile failure index can be obtained as Eq. (5):
(5)
where ɛice is the loading strain rate of ice.
The Derradji-Aouat failure criterion is determined by the absolute maximum octahedral shear stress and hydrostatic pressure. However, it is important to note that the absolute maximum octahedral shear stress of ice and hydrostatic pressure of ice are temperature-dependent (Derradji-Aouat, 2003). Since the Derradji-Aouat criterion has already incorporated temperature effects, no further modification is needed. The Derradji-Aouat failure index is as Eq. (6):
(6)
where λs is one of the center coordinates of the elliptical failure curve, related to the phase transition pressure (Derradji-Aouat, 2003), λs is taken as 45 MPa; q is the deviatoric shear stress; n is taken as 2; Psc is the hydrostatic pressure of ice, for computational efficiency, Psc is taken as 55 MPa.
Finally, all parameters required for failure indices are listed in Table 3.
Table 3. The parameter required for failure indices.

Parameter	formula
Friction angle (Fish and Zaretsky, 1997)	
Cohesion (Fish and Zaretsky, 1997)	
Tensile strength of ice (Hongbiao, 2016)	
Ice melting pressure (Wagner et al., 2011)	
Absolute maximum octahedral shear stress of ice (Derradji-Aouat, 2003)	
Hydrostatic pressure of ice (Derradji-Aouat, 2003)	
Where 
, 
, 
, 
, 
where s0-ice and φ0-ice are the cohesion and internal friction angle of ice at 0 °C, s0-ice is taken as 5.37 MPa, φ0-ice is taken as 0.04; Tmelt is the melting temperature of ice; Pmelt is the melting temperature of ice; ɛice is the loading strain rate of ice. For computational efficiency, Psc is taken as 55 MPa.
2.3. Physical model setup
A 2D axisymmetric coupled ATM model of the Antarctic air drill is established, based on the parameters and test data of the RAM-2 drill (Gibson et al., 2021). The borehole has a diameter of 76 mm and a depth of 50 m, with a 38 mm diameter drill hose. Standard practice requires surrounding ice to be at least 15 times thicker than the borehole diameter. To save computational resources and consider drilling impacts on surrounding ice, the surrounding ice dimensions are set to 2.4 m × 2.4 m × 50 m.
The boundary conditions are specified as follows: For the deformation field of the surrounding ice, the top and the lateral boundary close to the flow field are set as free boundaries, while the outer lateral boundary and the bottom of the surrounding ice are set as roller supports. For the flow field, pressure point restrictions are applied to the top. The inlet uses a mass flow rate boundary condition, increasing from 0 to 0.36 kg s−1 within 50 s. The outlet boundary condition employs pressure constraint, with the boundary pressure equal to the reference pressure of 1 atm. For the temperature field, the outer lateral boundary of the model is maintained at a constant temperature gradient. The internal initial temperature conditions are consistent with the outer lateral boundary. Additionally, in the deformation and the flow fields, gravity is set at 9.8 m/s2.
The temperature profile of the Dome F hole is selected for the ice wall's temperature gradient due to its significant gradient in the first 50 m. This allows for a more effective demonstration of how the Antarctic ice sheet's own temperature gradient affects the borehole stability. The ice sheet's temperature gradient is represented by the Eq. (7), with the data from a related study (Talalay et al., 2020):
(7)
where z is the depth of borehole.
The real thermodynamic behavior and properties of air and ice are calculated using equations in Table 1, Table 2, and Table 3. It should be noted that the Helmholtz energy thermodynamic model of air employs density and temperature as dependent variables. However, in practical engineering, pressure is usually the known quantity rather than density. As a result, density must first be solved using temperature and pressure. This solution process is implicit and is solved numerically through iterations using MATLAB software. Then, COMSOL Multiphysics is adopted to solve this model with a finite element method. The equations in Table 1, Table 2, and Table 3 are set in COMSOL as material properties. “Heat Transfer in Solids and Fluids,” “Turbulent Flow, k-ε,” “Solid Mechanics,” “Nonisothermal Flow,” and “Fluid-Structure Interaction” are selected to write Eq. (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7). The primary variables to be solved in the simulation are identified as air density, pressure, velocity, temperature, ice wall stress, temperature, failure indices, and their spatial distributions.
The solver adopts the implicit backward differentiation formula (BDF) method of a time-dependent solver. Other parameters related to accuracy are set to the default values provided by COMSOL. The solution is divided into two steps. The first step is to perform a time-dependent solution for the “Heat Transfer in Solids and Fluids,” “Turbulent Flow, k-ε,” “Solid Mechanics,” and “Nonisothermal Flow” interfaces. The second step is to perform a stationary solution for the “Turbulent Flow, k-ε,” “Solid Mechanics,” “Moving Mesh,” and “Fluid-Structure Interaction” interfaces.
40,877 mesh elements are produced for the geometry model with an average mesh quality of 0.84 and a minimum element quality of 0.10. The mesh element uses a linear geometric shape function.
This mesh generation is seen in Fig. 3. All setting parameters are shown in Table 4, with the parameters not listed in this table being set to the default variable expressions provided by COMSOL.
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (229KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. The geometric structure and mesh deformation of the ATM model.

Table 4. Model setting parameters.

Parameter	Value	Unit
Inner diameter	0.038	m
Outer diameters	0.076	m
Depth	50	m
Surrounding ice pressure	8	kPa m−1
gravity	9.8	m s−2
Air mass flow rate	0.36	kg s−1
Air inlet temperature 1	253.15	K
Air inlet temperature 2	258.15	K
Air inlet temperature 3	263.15	K
Air inlet temperature 4	268.15	K
Air inlet temperature 5	273.15	K
Ice latent heat	334	kJ kg−1
Buffer time of fluid	50	s
Total time step	3000	s
Note: 1. The time required for the fluid to reach the specified temperature and mass flow rate must be taken into consideration.
The mesh independence verification and two supplementary verifications have been added in Appendices B and C. Note that the validations provided in Appendix C are indirect and supplementary. The model has not been validated with experimental or field data, as laboratory simulations are difficult to perform and field measurements require challenging scientific expeditions to Antarctica. As such, this model merely furnishes a pre-theoretical framework for the upcoming Antarctic expedition's air drilling, intended to be verified with actual measurements in the next scientific expedition to Antarctica.
3. Result and discussion
3.1. ATM coupling effect analysis of Antarctic air drilling
Fig. 4 illustrates the distribution characteristics of air density and air velocity at the fluid-solid interface. The x-axis is displayed in logarithmic scale to highlight the variations in the transition zone between the annulus and the bottom hole.
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (155KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Air velocity and density distribution at the fluid-solid interface.

As illustrated in Fig. 4, air velocity at the fluid-solid interface follows a consistent pattern under all initial conditions. Initially, the air velocity increases from 85 to 115 m/s to 170–185 m/s, followed by a sharp decline to 60 m/s. As distance increases from 1 to 10 m, the air velocity gradually decreases to below 50 m/s. Beyond 10 m, velocity rises slightly to 45 m/s.
Air density trends are inversely related to velocity. At the fluid-solid interface, air density initially decreases from 2.32 to 2.18 kg/m3 to 2.01–1.87 kg/m3. Subsequently, it increases rapidly to 1.90–2.08 kg/m3. Extending from 0.1 to 10 m, it stabilizes between 1.95 kg/m3 and 2.0 kg/m3. Beyond 10 m, a decline in air density is observed, reaching a minimum of 1.6 kg/m3.
The abrupt variations in air density and velocity within the “transition zone” (0.01–0.03 m from the bottom hole, including the complete trajectory of air from the bottom hole to the annular channel) depicted in Fig. 4, which are attributed to the behavior of air flow in the drill hose. After exiting from the drill hose, air initially maintains its original velocity direction until it hits the bottom of the borehole, where a massive portion of air particles accumulates. Following minor energy loss from a subset of air particles, velocity direction reverses, leading to upward motion.
It can be seen in Fig. 4 that the initial air injection temperature directly affects air velocity and inversely affects air density: When the initial air injection temperature is set at 273.5 K, maximum velocity reaches 185 m/s, and density reaches 2.18 kg/m3. When the initial air injection temperature is set at 263.5 K, velocity approaches 180 m/s, and density approaches 2.24 kg/m3. When the initial air injection temperature is set at 253.5 K, velocity reaches 170 m/s, and density reaches 2.32 kg/m3.
The following fact can be used to explain this phenomenon: In non-isothermal flow, higher air temperatures increase air particle movement, thus raising the velocity. Finally, the accelerated movement of a single particle increases the distance between air molecules. Their distribution, looser than the initial status, leads to a decrease in density.
Fig. 5 illustrates the distribution characteristics of temperature, von Mises stress, and air pressure around the borehole at the fluid-solid interface. The x-axis is displayed in logarithmic scale to highlight the variations in the transition zone between the annulus and the bottom hole.
Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (210KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Air pressure and ice wall temperature, stress distribution at the fluid-solid interface.

Under any initial conditions, similar trends are exhibited in air pressure, borehole stress, and temperature around the borehole: From 0 to 0.03 m, air pressure and borehole temperature decrease sharply, while borehole stress increases. Specifically, air pressure drops from approximately 0.075 MPa to about 0.05 MPa, the borehole temperature decreases from 280 K–260 K to 275 K–255 K, and borehole stress rises from about 0.28 MPa to about 0.3 MPa. From 0.03 to 0.1 m, air pressure and borehole temperature increase rapidly, while borehole stress declines. Air pressure rises to approximately 0.06 MPa, borehole temperature rises to a range of 290–270 K, and borehole stress declines to around 0.29 MPa. Beyond 0.1 m, air pressure, borehole stress, and borehole temperature all decrease. Borehole stress and air pressure approach near-zero values, and borehole temperature drops below the initial ice wall temperature (220 K or lower), indicating heat transfer from the ice wall to the air.
The sharp shifts in air pressure are consistent with the abrupt variations in air velocity and density within the “transition zone.” These phenomena result from air movement from the bottom of the borehole to the annulus channel.
As for the borehole temperature and stress, which vary due to the “aero-thermo-mechanical coupling effect” (the ATM effect). The temperature and stress fields of the borehole are influenced by the ATM effect, which causes their distribution to align with the air “transition zone.” The comparison between air pressure and borehole stress reveals that borehole stress is always higher than air pressure, with opposite varying trends in the “transition zone.” This indicates that Antarctic air drilling is underbalanced drilling. Its borehole tends to inward shrinkage, leading to potential closure or collapse risks.
The initial air injection temperature directly affects air pressure and temperature levels of the borehole but inversely affects the borehole stress levels: When the initial air injection temperature is set at 273.5 K, the maximum air pressure can reach 0.0795 MPa, the maximum borehole stress can reach 0.296 MPa, and the maximum borehole temperature can reach 294 K. When the initial air injection temperature is 263.5 K, the maximum air pressure can reach 0.0778 MPa, the maximum stress around the borehole can reach 0.299 MPa, and the maximum borehole temperature can reach 283 K. When the initial air injection temperature is set to 253.5 K, the maximum air pressure can reach 0.0759 MPa, the maximum borehole stress can reach 0.304 MPa, and the maximum borehole temperature can reach 271 K.
The reason for this increase in air pressure is as follows: In conditions of non-isothermal flow, the higher air temperature speeds up the frequency of air particle movement. Because of their greater mobility, the particles are more likely to collide with the ice wall, which raises the pressure. Besides, higher air temperatures lead to a more noticeable temperature difference between the air and the ice wall, encouraging more heat transfer between the air and the ice wall.
The decline in the integral level of borehole stress is attributable to the following factors: The increase in air pressure leads to an enhancement in the supporting effect on the borehole, resulting in the borehole shrinkage trend slowing down.
As illustrated in Fig. 6 , the distribution characteristics of temperature and pressure (stress) in the borehole bottom, the annulus channel, and the ice wall are demonstrated under all air injection temperatures.
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (423KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Thermal-force distribution near the bottom of the borehole.

From the drill hose to the borehole bottom, the air temperature and pressure increase. Upon entering the annulus channel, temperature and pressure drop sharply, then partially recover. This transition zone (0.02–0.038 m horizontally and 0.01–0.03 m vertically from the borehole bottom midpoint) arises from air flow behavior in the drill hose. After exiting the drill hose, air maintains its velocity until colliding with the borehole bottom, where a mass of particles deposits. The other particles experience an energy loss, with velocity direction shifting to upward motion.
There is a close correlation between the air's temperature-pressure distribution in the annulus channel and the temperature-stress distribution in the ice wall. Near the annulus channel's transition zone, Significant ice wall temperature reductions and ice wall stress increases take place within 0.01–0.03 m vertically from the borehole bottom. These effects weaken with distance and vanish beyond 0.07 m. This correlation confirms that ice wall temperature and stress fields are strongly influenced by airflow and heat transfer.
The initial air injection temperature also affects the integral level of temperature and pressure (stress) in the borehole bottom, the annulus channel, and the ice wall. At the borehole bottom, the annulus channel, and the ice wall, a higher initial air injection temperature causes the temperature and pressure of air to rise. Meanwhile, the borehole stress slightly decreases as the air pressure increases. When the initial air injection temperature is set to 273.5 K, the maximum temperature reaches 306 K, and the maximum stress reaches 0.299 MPa. When the initial air injection temperature is set to 263.5 K, the maximum temperature increases to 294 K, and the maximum stress reaches 0.302 MPa. When the initial air injection temperature is set to 253.5 K, the maximum temperature increases to 282 K, and the maximum stress reaches 0.307 MPa.
The underlying mechanism for this increase in pressure is the non-isothermal flow of air, in which a higher air temperature causes air particles to move more quickly. This increases molecular mobility, leading to more frequent collisions with the ice wall and a resulting pressure rise. The decline in borehole stress results from increased air pressure, which enhances borehole support and reduces its contraction trend.
Concurrently, a noticeable discontinuity is observed in temperatures and pressures between the annular channel and the borehole. The temperature within the annulus channel exceeds that of the borehole, while the pressure within the annulus is lower than that of the borehole. Air pressure and ice wall stress vary inversely. The temperature discontinuity occurs due to different heat transfer efficiencies and modes between the air and the ice wall, as well as ice phase transitions. The air pressure is lower than the borehole stress. It is consistent with the characteristics of air drilling, which is an underbalanced drilling: An increase in air pressure results in a corresponding decrease in borehole stress. This indicates that the structure's horizontal stress is larger than the air pressure supporting it, leading to inward contraction and potential closure risks.
Data comparisons reveal a “transition zone” in the air flow and ice wall fields. It is on the annulus channel near the borehole bottom (0.02–0.038 m horizontally and 0.01–0.03 m vertically). In this zone, air pressure, velocity, temperature, and borehole stress change sharply, with extreme values observed. Thus, borehole closure and even collapse are most likely to occur here.
3.2. Evaluation of ice wall failure criterion
As illustrated in Fig. 7, the variation curves of the four failure indices at the fluid-solid interface demonstrate a clear trend. Under any initial conditions, failure indices (except for the phase transition failure index) show that the bottom of the borehole is most prone to closure or collapse. The risk declines along the fluid-solid interface. Among these indices, the tensile failure index is the highest, while the shear failure index is the lowest. As for the Derradji-Aouat failure index, it lies in the middle. It is also noted that no general rule can be established for the phase transition failure index, as it varies greatly with the injected air temperature. Finally, the three failure indices (excluding the Derradji-Aouat index) positively correlate with temperature, while the Derradji-Aouat index negatively correlates.
Fig. 7
Download: Download high-res image (411KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Failure indices distribution at the fluid-solid interface.

Regarding the shear failure index, it has been revealed as follows: when the initial injection air temperature is set at 273.5 K, the maximum shear failure index can attain a value of 0.046. When the initial air injection temperature is 263.5 K, the maximum shear failure index is recorded at 0.032. When the initial air injection temperature is set at 253.5 K, the maximum shear failure index approaches 0.032. Under these conditions, the shear failure index in the transition zone exhibits a phenomenon of the first sharp decline and then rapid rise. After the transition zone, the failure index decreases to zero as it moves farther from the borehole's base. A comparison of Fig. 5 reveals a similar trend in the variation law of shear failure index and air pressure, suggesting a strong correlation between shear failure and air pressure. The decline in air pressure results in the minimum value of shear failure in the transition zone. This finding shows the efficacy of the shear failure index in assessing the impact of air pressure on the stability of ice walls.
Regarding the phase transition failure index, it has been revealed as follows: When the initial injection air temperature is 273.5 K, the integral level of the index remains relatively stable, reaching a maximum of 0.25 in the transition zone. When the initial air injection temperature is 263.5 K, the phase transition failure index undergoes significant fluctuations, with the transition zone fluctuating between 6 and 1. Then, it experiences a rapid decline to 0 upon moving farther from the bottom of the borehole. When the initial air injection temperature is 253.5 K, the phase transition failure index remains at 0. A comparison with the ice phase transition curve reveals that the variation trend of the phase transition failure index is similar to that of the ice phase transition curve. This observation accurately reflects the impact of phase transition on the brittle failure of ice walls. However, when the initial injection air temperature is elevated to 273.5 K, the phase transition failure index exhibits an irregular increase in the region where the phase transition at the borehole's base is weak. This phenomenon occurs because the surface ice at the fluid-solid border melts and turns into liquid at this temperature. Concurrently, the surface liquid layer begins to absorb heat, which slows the melting of the inner ice. Thus, the inner ice has a larger tensile strength than the outer ice. However, in areas with weak phase transitions, the ice doesn't fully melt. Instead, it softens. This lowers its tensile strength.
Regarding the tensile failure index, it was observed as follows: When the initial air injection temperature is set at 273.5 K, the tensile failure index attains a value bigger than 6. Conversely, when the initial air injection temperature is 263.5 K, the tensile failure index undergoes a substantial change, fluctuating between 6 and 1. At an initial air injection temperature of 253.5 K, the tensile failure index approaches 1. Under these three conditions, the tensile failure index decreases to 0 as it moves further from the bottom of the borehole. Similar variation laws are revealed by the comparisons between the tensile failure index, the phase transition failure index, and the phase transition curve at the fluid-solid interface. This similarity arises because the tensile failure index uses the minimum principal stress and tensile strength to evaluate borehole failure, while the phase transition failure index uses phase transition pressure and tensile strength. It is evident that both of those use tensile strength to assess borehole stability. The tensile strength of ice is influenced by temperature and phase transition, resulting in similar variation laws for both. However, the phase transition failure index mainly reflects the impact of phase changes on borehole stability, while the tensile failure index is more influenced by tensile strength's effect on borehole stability.
For the Derradji-Aouat failure index, there are few differences across varying air temperature conditions, with the maximum value close to 0.67. As shown by comparing Fig. 5 and Fig. 7, the Derradji-Aouat failure index has a similar trend to the borehole stress (von Mises) variation. This suggests it can accurately reflect the borehole's stress distribution.
Comparative analysis of various failure indices reveals that the modified failure indices are more sensitive to temperature than the Derradji-Aouat failure index.
In practical drilling operations, these indices have different advantages and applicable scopes: The shear failure index can effectively assess ice sheets, especially in areas like the snow-firn zone with weak shear strength. The phase transition failure index can reflect the influence of phase transition on ice wall stability. It suits evaluating areas with high temperatures and easy phase transitions in the ice sheet, like the warm ice zone. The tensile failure index is especially suitable for assessing underbalanced drilling, where drilling fluid pressure is lower than the formation's tectonic stress. The Derradji-Aouat failure index can accurately reflect the overall stress distribution of the borehole. Further, the four failure indices can be applied together to provide a thorough and complementary evaluation of the drilling operation.
3.3. Production control
In the practical operation, the distribution characteristics of the pressure and temperature fields of the ice wall are critical for determining its stability. Monitoring these fields within the borehole is crucial for continuous drilling. However, real-time monitoring of ice wall pressure and temperature remains challenging. In contrast, monitoring outlet air properties such as pressure, temperature, and density is easier.
As shown in Section 3.1, the distributions of stress and temperature fields in the ice wall are like the air velocity, pressure, and temperature distributions in the annulus. This observation can be attributed to the presence of an ATM coupling effect within the borehole.
Therefore, by monitoring outlet air properties, the ice wall's pressure and temperature fields can be indirectly assessed. The output results can be evaluated by using the four failure indices in 3.2. Once control decisions are made, the pressure and temperature in the bottom of the borehole can be indirectly controlled by adjusting the injected air's pressure, density, and temperature. Finally, the regulatory process is illustrated in Fig. 8.
Fig. 8
Download: Download high-res image (396KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Production control progress.

In this study, the initial input parameters are set as Table 1. The final output results are shown in Fig. 4, Fig. 5, and Fig. 6. The four failure indices employed for evaluation are the shear failure index, phase transition failure index, tensile failure index, and Derradi-Aouat failure index. The results are shown in Fig. 7. The findings reveal that at an initial air injection temperature of 273.5 K, the probability of shear failure is negligible, while the risk of tensile failure due to phase transition is substantial. However, when the initial air injection temperature is set to 253.5 K, the risk of wellbore instability due to phase change is nearly eliminated, and the risk of tensile failure is substantially reduced. Although the Derradi-Aouat failure index increases, its range is not high. Comparing the failure index distributions at 273.5 K and 253.5 K shows that lowering the air injection temperature can effectively reduce the phase transition and tensile failure indices, while the Derradji-Aouat failure index remains largely unaffected. Consequently, it is determined that the temperature of the injected air should be further reduced to mitigate the risk of tensile failure.
Initially, the temperature of the injected air is adjusted to 243.5 K, as illustrated in Fig. 9(a). As shown in Fig. 9(a), reducing the injected air temperature to 243.5 K lowers the tensile failure index below 1, with a maximum of about 0.92. Meanwhile, the Derradi-Aouat failure index remains relatively stable. These indicate that the borehole is largely insulated from the risk of tensile failure. To ensure drilling safety, the air temperature injection was subsequently adjusted to 233.5 K, as illustrated in Fig. 9(b). The tensile failure index further decreases, reaching a maximum of 0.85. However, this decrease isn't statistically significant. Since further reducing air temperature offers minimal benefits and the basic control objectives have been met, adjusting the air input temperature to 243.5 K is sufficient.
Fig. 9
Download: Download high-res image (131KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Outcome of failure indices.

4. Conclusions
The study establishes an ATM model of ice air drilling. It enables analysis of air's thermodynamic properties and behavior, as well as the distribution of the borehole's stress and temperature fields, during Antarctic air drilling. It also reveals the ATM coupling effect within the borehole. Based on the ATM coupling effect, a production control process is proposed. Additionally, to reflect the ice wall's thermal sensitivity, the maximum tensile stress criterion, Mogi-Coulomb failure criterion, and Teardrop failure criterion are modified from three perspectives of tensile, shear, and phase transition. These obtained failure indices are compared with the Derradji-Aouat failure index. Key findings include:
(1) During operations, the air pressure is lower than the ice wall stress. The horizontal structural stress is higher than the air pressure that provides support, causing the borehole to shrink and even closure or collapse. The brittle failure mode of the ice wall is mainly tensile failure. It is imperative to note that the risk of tensile failure can be mitigated by reducing the temperature of the air injected.
(2) The compressed air's initial temperature is directly proportional to the air's pressure, velocity, and temperature within the annular channel, but it is inversely proportional to the air density. This phenomenon causes an increased borehole temperature and a drop in borehole stress (the von Mises stress).
(3) As air flows from the drill hose into the annulus, it encounters a “transition zone” where air properties change significantly. The ATM coupling effect creates a corresponding sharp change area in the temperature distribution characteristics of the borehole. Meanwhile, the stress field distribution of the borehole also changes to some extent. In this area, peaks of borehole stress and temperature occur, increasing the likelihood of borehole deformation or closure.
(4) The modified tensile failure index, shear failure index, and phase transition failure index in this study can quantify high-strain-rate brittle failure risks from the perspective of tension, shear, and phase transition. Furthermore, these indices exhibit enhanced temperature sensitivity in comparison with the Derradji-Aouat failure index. The shear failure index can effectively assess ice sheets, especially in areas like the snow-firn zone with weak shear strength. The phase transition failure index can reflect the influence of phase transition on ice wall stability. It suits evaluating areas with high temperatures and easy phase transitions in the ice sheet, like the warm ice zone. The tensile failure index is especially suitable for assessing underbalanced drilling, where drilling fluid pressure is lower than the formation's tectonic stress. The Derradji-Aouat failure index can accurately reflect the overall stress distribution of the borehole. Further, the four failure indices can be applied together to provide a thorough and complementary evaluation of the drilling operation process.
Besides, this study focuses on the thermodynamic interaction between air and the ice zone of the Antarctic ice sheet. In the snow-firn zone, porosity and permeability play significant roles. For air drilling operations, casing is used to prevent the snow and firn's direct contact with circulating air. In subsequent research, an analysis of drilling in the snow-firn zone will be conducted.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Yi Wei: Writing – original draft, Software, Methodology, Formal analysis. Yongsheng Liu: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Methodology, Investigation, Conceptualization. Haoran Xu: Validation, Software, Investigation. Zijun Dou: Resources, Investigation, Data curation. Gansheng Yang: Supervision, Project administration.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2021YFA0719100), Natural Science Foundation of China (No.42272362), Key Laboratory of Polar Geology and Marine Mineral Resources (China University of Geosciences, Beijing), Ministry of Education, China (Number: HNPY-202412), Hainan Institute of China University of Geosciences, Beijing(Number: HNPY-202412) and Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, China (No.379202408). We also thank the reviewers of the original manuscript, whose comments and suggestions helped to improve this paper.
Appendix A. List of symbols
Symbol	Physical Quantity	Unit
U	Air velocity vector	m/s
P	Air pressure	Pa
Cp	Specific isobaric heat capacity of air	J mol−1 K−1
Cv	Specific isothermal heat capacity	J mol−1 K−1
qr	Radiation heat flux vector of air	W m−2
Qair-other	Other heat terms for air	W
λ	Thermal conductivity of air	W m−1 K−1
ρ	Air density, Air's molar mass M = 0.2897 kg mol−1	kg m−3 (Dynamics)
mol L−1 (Thermodynamic state)
η	Dynamic viscosity of air	kg s−1
λ	Thermal conductivity of air	W m−2 K−1
T	Air temperature	K
α	Molar helmholtz free energy	J mol−1
δ	Reduce density, δ = ρ/ρj	
τ	Reduce Temperature, τ = Tj/T	
R	Ideal gas constant (8.314510 ± 0.000070)	J mol−1 K−1
Tj	Temperature of air at the maximum temperature point, Tj = 132 K	K
ρj	Temperature of air at the maximum temperature point, ρj = 10.447 mol L−1	mol L−1
Pice	Ice stress	Pa
Cp-ice	Isobaric heat capacity of ice	J kg−1 K−1
Uice	Translation speed of ice	m/s
Qice-other	Other heat terms for ice	W
qice	Conduction heat flux vector of ice	W m−2
qr-ice	Radiation heat flux vector of ice	W m−2
ρice	ice density	kg m−3
σ	Total stress tensor of ice	Pa
Dice	Elastic modulus of ice	Pa
ηice	Viscosity of ice	Pa·s
εel	Strain tensor of ice	
εth	Thermal strain tensor of ice	
εtv	Thermal viscosity tensor of ice	
gice	Gibbs free energy	J kg−1
g	Gravitational acceleration	m s−2
g	Gravitational acceleration vector	m s−2
Φice	Friction angle of ice	
sice	Cohesion of ice	Pa
Φ0-ice	Friction angle of ice at 0 °C	
s0-ice	Cohesion of ice at 0 °C	Pa
σt-ice	Tensile strength of ice	Pa
εice	Loading strain rate of ice	s−1
Tmelt	Melting temperature of ice	K
p⁎	Pressure at the gas-liquid-gas-solid three-point	Pa
T⁎	Temperature at the gas-liquid-gas-solid three-point	K
q	Deviatoric shear stress;	Pa
qs-max	Absolute maximum octahedral shear stress of ice	Pa
PSC	Hydrostatic pressure of ice	Pa
σi	Principal stresses of ice	Pa
τoct	Shear strength of ice	Pa
Appendix B. The mesh independence verification
Fig. 10
Download: Download high-res image (191KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 10. The mesh independence verification.

The mesh independence verification is shown in Fig. 10. Three sets of meshes with 40,877, 48701, and 50,948 elements are used for testing. The results based on the three sets of meshes are shown in Fig. 10, having almost the same accuracy. However, on a personal computer, the computational times differ: 55 min for 40,877 elements, 1 h 1 min for 48,701 elements, and 1 h 7 min for 50,948 elements. Thus, the set of mesh with 40,877 elements is chosen for simulation.
Appendix C. Supplementary verifications for the ATM model
There are two supplementary verifications for the ATM model as follows:
Fig. 11
Download: Download high-res image (218KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 11. Comparison in the annulus temperature between the Antarctic air drilling and the Arctic drilling fluid drilling.

The first is a comparison with the Arctic drilling fluid drilling (Wu et al., 2024) shown in Fig. 11. The (a) is the temperature distribution of this study, while the (b) is from Wu and Xu et al (Wu et al., 2024).
Fig. 11 shows that the temperature distribution trend in the annulus of Antarctic air drilling is similar to that in Arctic drilling fluid drilling. The differences are as follows:
(1) At the bottom of the borehole, there is an abrupt change in temperature in Antarctic air drilling, which is absent in Arctic drilling fluid drilling. This is due to air collisions, splits, and non-isothermal flows at the bottom of the borehole. As a compressible gas, air alters its properties during flowing. In contrast, drilling fluid is incompressible.
(2) Air drilling has temperature changes in the annulus mainly concentrated within 10 m above the bottom of the borehole. However, in drilling fluid drilling, the temperature distribution covers a larger depth range. This is primarily because the ice wall has higher heat transfer efficiency than permafrost.
Fig. 12
Download: Download high-res image (134KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 12. Comparison with the classical TGM model.

The second is a comparison with classical thermo-gas-mechanical models shown in Fig. 12. Classical THM models use the ideal gas law for air flow and treat ice's thermodynamic properties as only temperature-dependent, based on experimental data. The governing equations of THM models have been integrated into COMSOL and validated through relevant tests. In contrast, our model employs the Helmholtz energy-based thermodynamic model for air and the IAPWS equation of state, where these properties are functions of both temperature and pressure. All other simulation conditions remain consistent.
Fig. 12 shows that when air is injected at 255.3 K, both the THM and ATM models show similar distribution trends at the fluid-solid interface. But they differ in the magnitude of the ice wall stress.