1. Introduction
An explosion and fire occurred at a refinery site leading to the evacuation of the site and to millions of pounds worth of damage to the facility. A laboratory investigation was carried out to establish the immediate cause and any underlying factors that may have contributed to the incident.
Failure of a section of insulated process pipework had occurred part way up a process column, Fig. 1. The pipe had failed on an approximately horizontal section, close to the bottom dead centre, Fig. 2a and b. Close to the failure, a walkway support bracket had been installed, Fig. 2c, in a position that suggested that interference between the bracket and the lagging/cladding system had occurred. The relative position of the bracket and the failure are shown in Fig. 2c and d.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. General image of process column and site of failure (indicated in red). (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of the article.)


Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. (a) Position of failure of process pipework, (b) detail of pipework fracture, (c) walkway bracket interaction with pipework lagging, (d) pipework bracket and failure (indicated).

A section of the process pipework was recovered for detailed analysis in the laboratory.
2. Examination
2.1. Visual examination
The pipe section recovered from the refinery was nominally 210 mm internal diameter and consisted of a straight section, some 1430 mm in length, together with two right-angle elbows.
The elbows had been circumferentially welded to the straight section of pipe. In the as-received condition, the majority of the pipe was coated with a fibrous lagging material over which a black adhesive tape had been wrapped to stabilise it during removal and transportation. The two ends and an area of the straight portion of the pipe, where failure had occurred, were exposed. The failure, shown in Fig. 2b, consisted of a longitudinal hole, approximately 180 mm in length and, at its widest opening, 60 mm in width in the circumferential direction.
The cladding, which would have formed the outer, weatherproof barrier, was thought to have been manufactured from an aluminium alloy, although none was present on the section delivered to the laboratory.
The cut end remote from the failure was labelled A and, nearest the failure, B. The wall thickness was measured at 90° intervals around the circumference at both ends using a calibrated micrometre. The mean values were 8.4 mm at end A and 8.7 mm at end B. Dimensionally, the pipe was consistent with American Petroleum Institute (API) schedule 40 pipe. The internal surface of the pipe appeared to have a dark, adherent oxide layer but was otherwise free of corrosion.
The external surface of the exposed pipe, following partial removal of the lagging, had a number of coating layers, two of which (a brown layer and a grey layer) were visible. The coating over most of the exposed surface was largely intact and there was little evidence of corrosion, Fig. 3a.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. (a) Section of pipework with lagging partially removed, (b) cut out in insulation material at position of bracket, (c and d) composite image of pipework with lagging removed, showing surface corrosion.

The insulation had the appearance of mineral or glass fibre and, where exposed, had a thickness of approximately 40–50 mm. Removal of the adhesive tape exposed the surface of the lagging and showed that it had been applied in segments.
The first section of lagging, from end A, had apparently been cut on site and had a length of approximately 350 mm. The next section, which overlapped the fracture, had a total length of approximately 430 mm, however, approximately 250 mm from one end, a cut-out approximately 80 mm in width had been made in the insulation and the surface of the pipe was visible at this position, Fig. 3b, and this was coincident with the position at which a walkway support bracket had passed close to the pipe, Fig. 2c. There was no evidence of grout, mastic or sealing compound that may have been applied to affect a weatherproof seal around the area where the bracket penetrated the pipe lagging. Around the elbow, closest to end B, six segments of cladding had been applied, Fig. 3a. A number of wires, approximately 1.0 mm in diameter, and steel banding (12.7 mm wide, 0.85 mm thick) secured the lagging. The wires and banding were metallic and non-magnetic and were therefore probably stainless steel.
Failure had occurred approximately at the bottom dead centre of the pipe, Fig. 2b, close to and below the position of the walkway bracket. The external surface of the pipe was heavily corroded in the area surrounding the fracture, Figs. 3c and d, and the corrosion extended approximately 1 m longitudinally and around one quarter of the circumference, centred around the bottom dead centre of the pipe. The lagging was degraded around this area and large volumes of friable, loose corrosion product were evident.
The remaining substrate material around the failure had a thickness of approximately 1 mm. Visually, there was little evidence of a fresh metallic fracture surface.
A sample of lagging/cladding recovered from the plant in an area unaffected by the incident was assessed. The lagging material had a thickness of approximately 50 mm. The cladding had the appearance of an aluminium alloy with a thickness of approximately 0.75 mm.
2.2. Chemical analysis
Chemical analysis of the parent pipe material was carried out using an optical emission spectroscopy (OES) technique. The results are shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Chemical analysis (mass%).

Empty Cell	C	Si	Mn	P	S	Cr	Mo	Ni
Sample 04477	0.21	0.29	0.84	0.010	0.009	0.17	0.06	0.07
Tolerance	±0.007	±0.007	±0.03	±0.002	±0.003	±0.007	±0.005	±0.009
ASTM 106/A Grade B	0.30 max	0.10 min	0.29–1.06	0.035 max	0.035 max	0.04 max	0.15 max	0.40 max
The chemical analysis was consistent with the requirements of ASTM A106/A Grade B [1].
Qualitative analysis of a sample of the cladding material was carried out using the energy dispersive analysis of X-rays (EDX) facility on a scanning electron microscope (SEM). This showed that the material was an aluminium alloy containing approximately 1% manganese, consistent with a 3000 series alloy. The banding and wire material were similarly analysed and both were consistent with a type 304 stainless steel.
2.3. Hardness tests
Hardness tests were carried out on a sample of the pipe material in accordance with BS EN ISO 6507-1:1998 “Metallic materials – Vickers hardness test”. The results, with an accuracy of ±3% gave a mean hardness of 152HV10 with a standard deviation of 3.
2.4. Tensile tests
Three standard tensile tests were carried out in accordance with BS EN 10002-1 “Metallic materials testing – method of test at ambient temperature” on parent material in the longitudinal direction. The results gave a mean 0.2% proof stress of 300 MPa and a tensile strength of 516 MPa. The tensile requirements for Grade B in ASTM A106/A are minimum yield strength of 240 MPa and a minimum tensile strength of 415 MPa, therefore, the material was compliant with the Standard.
2.5. Corrosion measurements and analysis
The pipe was sectioned to allow thickness measurements to be made in the corroded area and the internal surface was marked with a 50 mm grid pattern. The external surface of the pipe in the corroded region was too rough to allow ultrasonic thickness measurements to be carried out from the inside and consequently the measurements were made with an adapted deep-throated micrometre once the majority of the loose corrosion product had been removed.
The results showed that the corroded area was approximately 1.1 m long in the pipe longitudinal direction and had a maximum width in the circumferential direction, at the position of the failure, of 280 mm. The thickness profile data is shown in Fig. 4a (the red line indicating the longitudinal extent of the failure). Based on the area and loss of wall thickness, the amount of material lost from the surface was estimated to be approximately 3 kg. The area immediately adjacent to the failure had a mean thickness of approximately 1 mm and a range of 1.5–0.5 mm.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. (a) Thickness profile of corroded area, approximate position of failure indicated, (b) microstructure of parent material.

2.5.1. Analysis of corrosion products
Samples of the corrosion deposit, from a number of areas, were taken for EDX analysis in the SEM. The results showed that the primary constituents were iron and oxygen together with significant quantities of sodium, chlorine and sulphur. In addition, other elements were also present in minor quantities. Analysis of the insulation material showed that it consisted predominantly of calcium and silicon together with smaller amounts of sodium, magnesium, aluminium and iron and was consistent with a calcium silicate based mineral wool.
2.6. Metallography
A longitudinal microsection taken from the parent material was polished to a 1 μm finish and etched in a 2% nitric acid solution. This showed a structure of ferrite and pearlite, Fig. 4b, consistent with a carbon content of approximately 0.2%. Some directionality of the microstructure indicated that the pipe had been hot formed. The microstructure was consistent with chemical analysis and mechanical properties data.
A longitudinal section taken through the coating system, Fig. 5a, showed that the coating had been made up of two paint layers. The lower layer, adjacent to the metal surface, had a thickness of approximately 75 μm and the upper layer a thickness of approximately 35 μm. EDX analysis of the coating system showed that the lower layer had a high zinc content together with smaller components of other elements and the upper layer had a high oxygen, silicon and titanium content with smaller components of other elements.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. (a) Section through pipe surface coating, (b) section through matrix material close to fracture surface, (c) micro-section through fracture surface.

A circumferential section was taken through the failure, Fig. 5b, and this showed that considerable thinning had occurred in the area around the failure. The microstructure at the point of failure, Fig. 5c, did not show any evidence of plastic deformation which would have been consistent with the ligament of remaining material stretching during final failure, however, it was apparent that the fracture surface had been corroded following failure and this evidence may well have been lost. The thickness of the remaining material close to the failure was approximately 0.5 mm.
3. Discussion
3.1. Pipe material
The pipe had been manufactured from a carbon–manganese steel whose properties, in terms of chemical analysis and tensile data, were compliant with the requirements of ASTM A106/A Grade B. Dimensionally the pipe was consistent with API schedule 40. The pipe, when new, had been fit for purpose and there was no evidence that inadequacies of the material contributed to failure.
3.2. Coatings
The pipe coating system documentation showed that the specified primer was a solvent based inorganic zinc material with a thickness of 65 μm and the specified top coat a silicone acrylic material with a thickness of 25 μm.
The EDX analysis showed that the coating was consistent with the specification and the thickness of the layers was slightly in excess of the specification. The coating remote from the failure was generally in good condition and there was no evidence to suggest that premature failure of the coating system contributed to the incident.
3.3. Insulation
The pipe insulation system documentation specified that the insulation could be manufactured from a range of materials including mineral wool pre-cut and pre-formed pipe covering. Chemical analysis of the lagging material on the failed pipe was consistent with this.
In addition, the dimensions and the materials for the wires and banding securing the insulation were also specified. The wires were specified as being 1.2 mm diameter stainless steel. Analysis showed that the material was a 304 grade stainless steel but that the wires had a diameter of 1.0 mm, somewhat smaller than specified. The banding was specified as 13 mm × 0.4 mm stainless steel. Analysis showed that it was consistent with a 304 grade stainless steel with dimensions 12.7 mm × 0.85 mm. There was no evidence that either the wires or the banding had degraded or that the variation in dimensions from those specified had any impact on the incident. The cladding material was also specified as 3000 or 5000 series aluminium alloy and, again, EDX analysis showed that it was compliant with the specification.
3.4. Corrosion under insulation (CUI)
It was apparent that the position of the walkway bracket and the insulated pipe resulted in some interference between the two systems. This had apparently been resolved by cutting out a section of the cladding and insulation to allow the bracket to be accommodated. It is not known whether the area had subsequently been treated to effect a weather-proof joint, however, there was no evidence of grout, mastic, sealant or other materials that would suggest that the area was suitably treated. However, it is possible that such materials had been consumed during the fire following the incident.
The proximity between insulated pipe systems and other equipment is addressed by a relevant Foster Wheeler Engineering Standard number 4210/29-82A1 (1992), “Hot service insulation for piping and equipment”, and states that: “A minimum clearance of 25 mm between the outside surface of any insulation finish and adjacent equipment, pipe or structural members shall be maintained”. In addition, a more recent BP document “Corrosion under insulation – A guide to prevention and detection of corrosion beneath thermal insulation” (No S/UTG/309/01, 2001), stated that: “the distance between any insulated pipe and adjacent structural steelwork, uninsulated pipe, etc., should be no less than twice the insulation design thickness on the former pipe to prevent awkward insulation geometry which permits water ingress”. The evidence showed that the installation was not compliant with either of these recommendations.
The evidence of the corrosion and its proximity to the cut away in the lagging strongly suggested that water entered the insulation system through the breach in the weather proofing jacketing. The water had probably migrated through the lagging and along the interface between the lagging and the pipe and formed a pool at the lowest point. The source of the water is likely to have been rain and, given the proximity of the plant to the coast, is likely to have contained some sodium chloride together with other industrial pollutants. Chemical analysis of the corrosion deposits showed evidence of chlorine, sodium and other components, however, it is possible that some of these may have resulted from contamination due to post-incident fire fighting activities.
The plant was approximately 13 years old and had been operated at a temperature of approximately 90 °C. Corrosion of an 8 mm thick pipe to 0.5 mm thick, over 13 years would require an average corrosion rate of 0.6 mm per year. Although uncertainties exist regarding the exact nature of the corrodant, temperature, wet dry cycles, etc. and therefore the rate at which corrosion would progress and, assuming that the paint coating on the pipe provided complete protection for 5 years [2], a corrosion rate of 0.9 mm per year would be required.
Temperature effects on corrosion rates are addressed in NACE Standard Recommended Practice (RP0198-2004) “The control of corrosion under thermal insulation and fireproofing materials – A systems approach”. Fig. 1 of this document shows the relationship between corrosion rates and temperature; the data indicates that at temperatures close to 100 °C, corrosion rates may exceed 0.75 mm per year.
The BP document referred to above states that “highest corrosion rates tend to be found within the 60-120 °C operating temperature band. While penetration rates of the order of 1.5 mm per year are fairly typical where such conditions exist, there have been isolated reports of penetration rates of more than 3 mm per year”.
These documents clearly showed that had the insulation been compromised at the time of installation, sufficient time had elapsed to allow corrosion penetration of the pipe.
The residual thickness of the pipe, measured around the fracture surface was approximately 0.5 mm. This indicates that the pipe had failed under the influence of the internal pressure once the thickness had been reduced to a critical level. Fracture had progressed longitudinally until the running crack had encountered thicker material and the stress intensity was reduced to a sub-critical level and the crack was arrested.
The root cause of this incident was firstly, a management failure to adequately assess the suitability of the installation design, with respect to the proximity of the walkway bracket to the pipework. Secondly, a failure to ensure that the implemented installation was adequately weatherproofed and thirdly, the lack of an adequate in-service inspection regime that might have identified degradation of the pipe prior to failure. This, and other related incidents have contributed to a major hazard industry-wide debate and increased regulator focus on lagged pipework and CUI issues.
4. Conclusions
1.
The material of construction of the pipe was consistent with codes and standards and fit for purpose.
2.
The pipe coating system appeared to be compliant with specifications; there was no evidence to suggest that an inadequacy of the coating contributed to failure.
3.
The lagging system appeared to be fit for purpose, there was no evidence that inadequacy of the intended system contributed to failure.
4.
Failure of the pipe had occurred as a result of corrosion under insulation (CUI), the rate of corrosion was entirely consistent with published data. The wall thickness of the pipe had been reduced to a level that would not support the internal pressure; the remaining ligament had then failed as a result of a ductile overload.
5.
The proximity of the pipe to the walkway bracket was not in compliance with published guidance.
6.
Water had entered the lagging system through a breach in the jacketing/lagging made to accommodate a walkway support bracket. It is probable that no adequate precautions were taken to weather-proof the penetration into the lagging system.
7.
The investigation has focussed both industry and regulator attention on the specific issues associated with lagged pipework and CUI.