pendent used nuclear fuel (UNF) storage installations in the United
States coastal or lake/river-side regions [1] and licensed for operating periods of up to 60 years since the 1980's. The fuel in these
systems and those that will be discharged in the foreseeable future
may need to remain in storage for up to 100 years [2]. In a host of
cases, a salt air environment exists. Therefore, it is likely that the
storage systems will be exposed to a salty environment for possibly
the entire storage period.
One type of dry storage system is the thin-walled stainless steel
(SS)-made welded canister within overpack (concrete or hollow SS
filled with concrete). The overpack both protects the canister from
weather and provides radiation shielding as radiation fluxes
through the thin canister are extremely high. SS304/304L and
SS316/316L are body material candidates (the compositions are
given in Table 1) for canisters [3]. SS308 and SS316 are weld materials for SS304 and SS316 body materials, respectively.
Recent evaluations by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission [1],
the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Nuclear Energy Used Fuel
Disposition Program [4], the Electric Power Research Institute
Extended Storage Collaboration Program [5] and the Nuclear Waste
Technical Review Board [6] claimed that the welded canisters are
robust due to low levels of degradation caused by thermal, mechanical and radiation effects. However, they are susceptible to
chloride-induced stress corrosion cracking (CISCC) as a film of
continuous deliquescent salts moisture can form and remain on the
surface. CISCC is one of the major technical gaps for extended dry
storage systems, and is therefore listed as the highest priority of
concern in the NRC and NWTRB reports.
The corrosion initiated by the deliquescence of atmospheric
water coupled with susceptible materials and residual stress can
lead to stress corrosion cracking (SCC). If it is induced by sea salt
particles which contain chlorides, this type of SCC is called
chloride-induced SCC. The mechanism is composed of the initiation
stage dominated by electrochemical mechanics and subsequently
the propagation stage, dominated by both electrochemistry and
metal separation.
CISCC causes SS pipes and vessels to deteriorate during chemical
processing. The deterioration by CISCC may lead to structural failures in industrial applications. This creates the potential for significant impacts on safety as it will lead to partial or through-wall
corrosion and cracking of the canisters. The integrity of canisters is
of paramount importance as the systems not only prevent the
release of radionuclides, but also provides an inert atmosphere
(helium backfilled) for the irradiated fuel. Helium backfilled inside
the welded canisters provides improved heat transfer and minimizes the potential for fuel degradation during subsequent storage.
If helium leaks and air is allowed to enter the canisters, together
with the moisture in the air, oxidation of the fuels and claddings
will occur.
Methods of mitigating or reducing CISCC on canister body and
welds are available. The industry is developing advanced canisters
which are made of CISCC resistant materials (e.g. SUS329J4L and
S31254 [7]), and employing modifying welding process (e.g. low
heat input, high speed, narrow weld zone) to reduce thermal
damage. However, in the past 20 years, the welded canisters have
been fabricated without mitigation.
Available studies indicate that the primary parameters affecting
the potential CISCC of the welded canisters are: the presence of
surface temperature variables, surface relative humidity, deliquescent sea salts concentration, and tensile stresses that are caused by
welding processes [8e11]. The decrease of decay heat with time
reduces the canister surface temperature. The surface temperature
is not homogeneous because the air flow is not uniform. During the
storage period, sea salts in the cooling air from the outer atmosphere are carried onto the canister surface and deposited. The
deliquescence of sea salts on the canister surface starts when the
surface temperature cools to the temperature for limiting relative
humidity (RHL). The deliquescence forms a corrosive aqueous
moisture layer on the canister surface and leads to pitting corrosion. Pitting corrosion is the trigger of SCC according to a multitude
of studies (e.g. Refs. [12e14]). Canisters are fabricated by cold
rolling and welding processes. The fabrication processes lead to
residual stresses in the welds, which are known to be sufficient to
promote SCC [15].
A critical review is conducted to study the realistic environmental conditions on the in-service canisters, including the surface
temperature variables due to time and surface locations, the surface
limiting relative humidity (RHL) for sea salts deliquescence, the
surface deposits caused by the transportation of sea salts and the
reaction of atmospheric gases, and the residual stress caused by
fabrication processes. The review also covers the CISCC related
experimental results of the canister materials, i.e., SS304/304L and
SS306. Although a large number of studies have been carried on the
SS SCC, many of them are not relevant to in-service canisters. This
review aims to study the specific concerns on CISCC of in-service
canisters.
2. The realistic environmental conditions
2.1. Surface temperature variables
A single point on the bottom of a mock-up canister was detected
[17] and it shows that the surface temperature decreased with time.
Moreover, the canister surface temperature could significantly vary,
depending on UNF decay heat, surface locations, and temporal
weather variations. Fuel temperature in the storages is limited to
200e300 C, depending on the burnup [18]. Within the overpacks,
passive air flow cools the canisters, but results in large temperature
gradients due to the flow of coolant air. Recent modeling [19,20], as
Table 1
Austenitic Stainless Steels used by the welded canisters.
AISI Chemical compositions (wt.%) Description
304 Fe-0.08 (max)C-2.00Mn-0.75Si-0.045P-0.030S-20.00Cr-12.00Ni-0.10N The general-purpose grade, widely used where favorable
formability and corrosion resistance are required.
304L Fe-0.03 (max)C-2.00Mn-0.75Si-0.045P-0.030S-20.00Cr-12.00Ni-0.10N As 304 but with lower carbon content to minimize
carbide precipitation during welding.
316 Fe-0.08 (max)C-2.00Mn-0.75Si-0.045P-0.030S-18.00Cr-14.00Ni-3.00Mo0.10N
As 304 but with molybdenum added to increase resistance
to localized corrosion in marine and chemical environments.
It is considerably better in many applications than SS304,
including the better resistance to pitting and sulfuric acid [16].
316L Fe-0.03 (max)C-2.00Mn-0.75Si-0.045P-0.030S-18.00Cr-14.00Ni-3.00Mo0.10N
As 316 but with lower carbon content to minimize carbide precipitation during
welding.
86 Y. Xie, J. Zhang / Journal of Nuclear Materials 466 (2015) 85e93
well as actual measurements on the surface of an in-service horizontal storage canister [21,22] show that the canister surface
temperatures vary greatly across the surface, cooler at the bottom
where the air flowing in the inlets of the overpack first contacts the
canister, and progressively hotter going up the canister side. The
modeling and measurement both show the temperature difference
can be more than 50 C on a canister.
2.2. Limiting relative humidity
Relative humidity (RH) is the ratio of partial pressure of vapor in
the air (P) to the saturated vapor pressure at the same temperature
(Psat). Temperature has a significant effect on RH. RH of a surface
with higher temperature is lower than RH of air with lower temperature (because Psat is higher on the surface). At the same temperature, higher ambient humidity (AH) makes RH higher.
However, AH changes only have slight influences on RH, and under
any likely conditions to occur, water content in the ambient air is
close to 30e35 g/m3
. The area between the blue curves in Fig. 1,
related with the temperature and RH, is the canister surface conditions most likely to occur.
The coastal environments in which many of the independent
UNF storage installation sites are located have high concentrations
of salts in the atmosphere. Dew, ocean spray, rainwater, fog, and
other forms of water splashing, which are dominated by sodiummagnesium chloride sulfate salts [21], are the source of salts that
may be deposited on the canister surface.
There is a possibility that the sea salts can undergo deliquescence and develop a highly concentrated chloride-containing
moisture film on the canister surface. Measured data shows the
deposited salts on the canister surface (inside overpack) for 19
years were 1 g/m2
, which is extremely low, but there is highly
concentrated brine that may be formed by deliquescence.
To reach high ionic concentration, the humidity level of the
canister surface must reach the deliquescent RH. Fig. 1 gives the
deliquescence RH values for some potentially relevant salts (e.g.
NaCl, MgCl2). It indicates all the single salt deliquescence RH values
are beyond 20%. While for sea salts, a multitude of studies (e.g. Ref.
[6,12]) have shown that corrosion occurs well below the deliquescence RH value of any single salt. This value is referred to limiting
relative humidity (RHL). The study [17] on the sea salts for the
corrosion of canisters suggests the RHL is 15% (Fig. 1 red line).
RHL is a crucial value when estimating the start of deliquescence
of mixing salts. This is because that at the early years of fuel storage,
the canister surface temperature is high, while, after a few years,
part of the surface will be cool enough to reach RHL. The decreasing
temperature may lead to the formation of moisture films on the
canister surface. Combine the 15% RH and 30e35 g/m3 water content in the ambient air, it is estimated that the corrosion process
will be initiated when the canister surface temperature decreases
to around 80 C.
2.3. Surface deposits results
The composition of salts on a canister is controlled by a host of
processes and will vary with geographical location, time, location
on the canister, and surface temperature. The sampling program for
studying the dust on the surface of the in-service canisters was
conducted by EPRI. It included the Calvert Cliffs SS dry storage
canisters, and the Hope Creek unused canisters.
The inspection on the Calvert Cliffs SS dry storage canister surface deposits [21] showed that the major anion species were sulfate
and nitrate, after 15.6 years deposition. The major cation species
were Ca2þ with less amounts of Kþ, Naþ, and Mg2þ. Considering the
sea water is dominantly a NaeMgeCleSO4 assemblage [23] and the
inland rainwater is dominantly a NH4eCaeNO3eSO4 [24], the
species of deposits more closely resembled inland rainwater than
standard seawater.
In addition to the composition of deposits, the actual chloride
concentration was well below 0.1 g/m2
. As the measured surface
temperature was in the range of 40e52 C, the salts were deliquescent and form a moisture film on the surface. According to the
lab tests [25], performed on SS U-bend samples using different
concentrations of deliquescent salts (0.1, 1.0, 10.0 g/m2 at 35e45 C),
this level of deposit concentration probably is out of the susceptibility range of chloride concentration for SCC occurrence.
The inspection on the Hope Creek unused canister [26] also
showed the salts were dominantly sulfates, with rare chlorides and
nitrates, after 7 years deposition. CaeSO4 and NaeAleSO4 were the
most common sulfates, but NaeSO4 and KeSO4 phases were also
present. The concentrations were not included in the report.
These inspections suggested that the deposits on the canister
surface were not pure sea salts. The deposits contained significant
amounts of sulfate salts and nitrate salts. They probably were
formed by the particle-gas conversion reactions involving chloride
and nitrate salts, and atmospheric SO2 or sulfuric acid [27]. The
reactions converted atmospheric aerosols into sulfates. Chloride
and nitrate salts would eventually convert to sulfates. The
composition and amount of brine present at any given time is
controlled not only by the rate of deposition of atmospheric aerosols, but also by the rate of exchange or reaction with reactive gases
in the air flowing through the overpacks.
Although the deposited salts were dominated by sulfates, it is
conservative to assume that the deposited salts are sea salts as
chlorides are the most aggressive species. The corrosivity of various
types of chlorides is discussed in Section 4.3.
2.4. Tensile stress
The tensile stress on a welded canister contains two parts:
applied stress and residual stress. The applied stress (e.g. internal
pressure) on the canister is not considered, as it is extremely low,
especially compared with the residual stress. The only significant
applied stress on a canister comes from the internal pressure. A
worst case calculation indicates the maximum value of internal
pressurization is 0.35 MPa hydrated uranium oxides (assuming 1 kg
of UO2$2H2O which yields 112 g of water) heated to 250 C by decay
heat after sealing [28]. Therefore, this maximum value of inner
pressure should not be high enough to lead to any significant
problems.
Residual stress caused by welding is the primary contributor of
Fig. 1. Relationship between RH, surface temperature, and conditions of deliquescence
for potentially relevant salt assemblages (datas are from Refs. [17,41,65]).
Y. Xie, J. Zhang / Journal of Nuclear Materials 466 (2015) 85e93 87
tensile stress. Canisters have several welding lines in the wall and
rid which probably have rich residual stresses. The welds have no
stress relief on the body longitudinal and circumferential welds and
the lid closure welds, due to the possibility that the post weld heat
treatment (i.e. thermally or mechanically annealed) will result in
sensitization, which often occurs in heat-affected zone (HAZ). The
sensitization makes chromium depleted at the grain boundaries,
leaving the material susceptible to intergranular corrosion [29].
Hence, no post weld heat treatment is applied on the welds. When
the welds are rapidly naturally cooled to room temperature, the
stresses in welds are residually high.
To understand the impact from residual stress, the structure of
the welded canister is studied. The thin-walled canisters are typically 13 mme16 mm thick, 1.5 m1.8 m diameter, and 4.0 me5.0 m
high. The representative canister welds contain the longitudinal
weld, circumferential weld, base plate weld, and lid-closure weld.
The processes for the construction of a representative canister are
summarized as below [30]:
 An austenitic stainless steel sheet is cold rolled to form a
cylinder.
 A longitudinal weld is applied to maintain the cylindrical shape.
 Two cylinders are then joined end-to-end by a circumferential
weld.
 Another circumferential weld secures the circular bottom plate
to the canister.
 Finally the circumferential lid closure weld is applied.
More dry storage system technologies are summarized in the
EPRI technique report [31].
The hoop residual stresses of the mock-up SS304/304L canister
(radius ¼ 1.30 m) circumferential joints were measured, and the
geometry of measured locations is shown in Fig. 2 [32]. Joint A
simulated the circumferential joint between the upper lid and the
shell body, and Joint B simulated the circumferential and longitudinal joints between bodies and that between the shell body and
the lower lid. The measured hoop residual stress distribution
around the welding line was near the 0.2% proof stress at 300 MPa,
which was also taken to be the yield stress. Hence, the tensile
stresses, at least in the direction measured, were equal to the yield
stresses. The measurement also suggested that the hoop residual
stresses of various welds did not have much differences.
However, NRC finite element weld residual stress modeling [30]
obtained large differences of hoop residual stresses at different
welds, and provided high predicted residual stress distributions.
First, the hoop stress and axial stress in a circumferential weld were
estimated (Fig. 3). The radial constraints applied in this analysis had
little effect on the surface. As to the hoop stress, the highest outer
surface residual stresses were between 220 MPa and 390 MPa. Note
that the maximum hoop stresses occurred in or near the weld were
tensile through the entire thickness, and remained exceedingly
near to or above yield (e.g. 290 MPa for SS304) along the chosen
paths through the thickness of the canister weld. Therefore, it has
paramount implications on crack growth. Second, the hoop stress
and axial stress in a longitudinal weld were estimated (Fig. 4).
Unlike the circumferential weld, the longitudinal weld resulted in
residual stresses with a larger axial than hoop component. The
largest values were between 450 MPa and 480 MPa. Both the
circumferential and longitudinal results suggested that the tensile
stresses are greatest parallel to the welds, and a CISCC indication
would have a tendency to grow perpendicular to the weld direction. The modeling also suggested that the weld residual stresses
are tensile, high and constant through the weld, therefore the high
residual stresses remain and leave the material move vulnerable to
SCC. However, it has never been proven through actual
measurement.
There are a number of other useful documents (e.g. Refs.
Fig. 2. Examples of measured locations of hoop residual stresses.
Fig. 3. Circumferential Weld Through-Wall Residual Stress; Left: With radial constraints; Right: Without radial constraints [30].
88 Y. Xie, J. Zhang / Journal of Nuclear Materials 466 (2015) 85e93
[33e35]) on the subject of residual stress in SS welds that, while
less relevant to the welds of the canisters, do provide unique and
interesting insights for the purpose of better understanding or
mitigating the problem of residual stress.
3. CISCC mechanism
With the materials used on the welded canisters, CISCC occurs
from the combined effects of pitting corrosion and residual stress.
The mechanism is composed of the initiation stage dominated by
electrochemical mechanics and the propagation stage, dominated
by both electrochemistry and metal separation.
3.1. Initiation stage
Stainless steel is resistant to electrochemical corrosion due to
chromium oxide passive layer (1e3 nm) [36]. However, the chloride
ions can damage the passive layer locally, and the damage was
reported in Refs. [37e39]. Where the steel loses passivity above a
critical potential, is called pitting potential, or film breakdown
potential; the phenomenon is responsible for pitting corrosion.
Because of the deliquescent sea salts, the canister surface aqueous
moisture film is strongly acidic, and therefore makes the steel
electrical potential higher than the pitting potential.
In the presence of chlorides, the passive film is locally destroyed
and a process of pitting corrosion is then initiated. The common
feature associated with pits is that the geometry of the cavity restricts mass transport between the solution in the cavity and that in
the moisture film. The pit acts as a fixed anode and the remainder of
the passive surface is cathode. It can result in changes of electrochemistry and electrode potential in the pits and subsequently in
the rates of electrode reactions. The changes depend on the geometry and dimensions of the pits, the mass transport processes,
time, the electrolyte composition and the electrode potential.
The initiation of CISCC by pitting corrosion is widely accepted
[40e45]. It is considered corrosion with local slip at the crack tip
and often found to initiate where pitting corrosion has occurred.
The studies [46e48] found SCC initiation starts from the bottom of
the pitting or crevice corrosion area. As the trigger of CISCC, pitting
corrosion is a major concern.
3.2. Propagation stage
Once a crack is initiated at a pit, it will propagate at a fast rate
under the conditions of metal dissolution and residual stress. The
likelihood of SCC propagation from an area of pitting corrosion
should increase with time as the depth of metal loss increases [49].
Metal separation is faster than electrochemical dissolution during
the process of propagation.
Crack propagation threshold conditions must all be satisfied,
otherwise the propagation will not occur. One study [12] found that
below RHL of 15% (pitting corrosion probably did not occur), no SCC
propagated in SS304 after 125 days with simulated residual stress.
Moreover, according to the competing theory [49], even if the
applied stress-intensity factor (K) exceeds the threshold stressintensity factor for SCC (i.e., K > K1SCC), a crack will only initiate
in a pit if the crack growth rate is more rapid than the rate of pit
growth. It is reasonable to expect that pitting corrosion will slow
down with time as a corroded area deepens and the diffusion distance increases. Overall, the SCC propagation demands the satisfaction of all threshold conditions.
4. Canister material failure
4.1. The temperature and limiting relative humidity
The effect of temperature on materials corrosion is overwhelmingly complex. There is a range of temperatures over which
localized corrosion and SCC can occur. When temperature is
beyond the range, it reduces the surface RH below RHL. At RH
values below RHL, it will prevent the formation of deliquescent
salts, hence corrosion cannot occur. Under a constant humidity, the
increase of temperature tends to increase the electrochemical and
diffusion kinetics, resulting in a higher corrosion rate [50,51]. On
the other hand, the increase of temperature decreases RH on the
surface, preventing the deliquescence of salts and decreasing the
evaporation of surface electrolyte, and therefore decreasing the
corrosion rate [52]. When temperature is below the range, it will
increase the surface RH to a high value and make the deliquesced
solution too dilute to support corrosion.
At the same applied stress, SS304 failure time at 50 C is much
longer than the temperature at 80 C [53]. Fig. 5 is the comparison
of test results of SS304 at 50 C and 80 C. At 50 C, the failure time
of applied stress of ~400 MPa is more than ten times longer than
the results at 80 C. Besides, most of the specimens had no failures
below 400 MPa at 50 C, indicating the possibility of failure is
extremely low at 50 C. Under the constant humidity (35%), the
decrease of temperature tends to decrease the electrochemical and
diffusion kinetics, resulting in a lower corrosion rate.
Fig. 6 is the SCC susceptibility map of the lab tests of U-bend
Fig. 4. Longitudinal weld through-wall residual stress; Left: With radial constraints; Right: Without radial constraints [30].
Y. Xie, J. Zhang / Journal of Nuclear Materials 466 (2015) 85e93 89
specimens [52]. The specimens were exposed to salt fog conditions
at 43, 85, and 120 C. Only specimens tested at 43 C exhibited
cracking. Cracking severity increased with exposure time: more
specimens cracked and crack lengths increased. The temperature
above 85 C, the RHL temperature, did not initiate SCC. The results
indicate RH above RHL for chloride salt deliquescence is indispensable for atmospheric chloride SCC.
A study [12] suggested the critical RH below which no CISCC to
occur at SS304, SS316 is equal to or higher than 15% for sea salt
particles up to 80 C for all test materials. It agrees with the limiting
relative humidity principle for the in-service canisters.
In the actual storage, the canister surface contacts with various
types of air, low temperature with high or low humidity, and
relatively high temperature with high or low humility; hence the
wet and dry conditions are varied in actual storages. The lab tests of
effect of varies of RH concluded that the repetition of the wet and
dry conditions in actual storage environment may not necessarily
accelerate CISCC even if the surface chloride concentration is high
enough to cause it in the constant temperature and humidity test at
the same test temperature [12].
A study [54,55] that compared the natural conditions (Miyakojima Island, Japan) with the accelerated conditions (60 C, 95%
RH, NaCl mist) supported the importance of the realistic environmental conditions when considering canisters' failure. The SCC
propagation rate in SS304/304L specimens under natural conditions was about 1.2  1012 to 1.8  1011 m/s in a K range of
0.6e9.0 MPa√m, and that under the accelerated test was about
1.0  1010 to 3.5  109 m/s in a K range of 0.5e30 MPa√m. The
SCC propagation rates under both conditions were independent of
the stress intensity factor K in the above range (except at a small K
value below 1 MPa√m). The propagation rates have two orders
difference under two conditions. Under the natural conditions, it
will take about 25e375 years to penetrate through a 15 mm
canister wall; while under the accelerated conditions, it will take
about 50 days to 48 years. However, both of the conditions do not
follow the realistic environmental conditions of in-service canisters. Although the study is a valuable reference for canister materials degradation, it cannot predict the actual failure.
4.2. Sea salts deposition concentration
As discussed in Section 3.1, the deliquescent sea salts include
aggressive chloride ions, which lead to the breakdown of a passive
film and the initiation of CISCC.
The investigation of the susceptibility of as-received and
sensitized SS304 U-bend specimens along with welded SS304
specimens to SCC in marine atmosphere conditions showed that (1)
cracks can occur in sensitized specimens with 1 and 10 g/m2 sea
salt deposition, (2) cracks can occur in as-received specimens with
10 g/m2 salt depositions, (3) interdendritic attack can occur on
welded specimens, all at 45 C [25]. If the sea salt concentrations
are below 1 g/m2
, cracks can rarely occur on the SS304 specimens.
4.3. Types of salts
A multitude of studies confirmed the corrosivity is critically
related to the types of salts but not sensitive to the concentration of
ions.
In a lab test of mixing chlorides, magnesium chloride was the
fastest to cause SS specimens failure; calcium chloride took a longer
time; sodium chloride was the slowest [56]. The results are
considered as the solubility and chloride activity between the
different salts as magnesium and calcium chlorides are more soluble than sodium chloride. Although magnesium chloride reacted
faster than calcium chloride in the study, most studies [57,58]
commonly confirmed that calcium chloride is the most likely
cause of CISCC of all sea salts at room temperature. The corrosivity
of salt deposits was controlled by equilibrium chloride concentration in the electrolyte of surface formed by the absorption of water
vapor. CaCl2 was more corrosive than MgCl2 because it forms more
concentrated solutions at a given RH.
At low chloride concentration (<0.5 g/L), sulfide salts show the
synergistic effect on CISCC especially in SS304 and SS316 as the
transgranular cracking was observed [59]. Sulfides are generally
detrimental to pitting resistance and crevice corrosion resistance in
all grades of SS. The susceptibility of CISCC increases with a high
sulfur content, as there is a higher density of sulfide inclusions,
which act as initiation sites for pits and stress corrosion cracks [60].
In the absence of hydrogen sulfide, these relatively low chloride
concentrations would not result in cracking at ambient
temperature.
4.4. Residual stress
As discussed in Section 3.2, the degradation caused by pitting
corrosion is slow, while the residual stress will propagate the
degradation at a fast rate. Although the previous studies of SCC of
dry storage utilized U-bend specimens are not real stress distribution of a real canister weld, the simulated stress distribution can
be considered in the range of real canisters' residual stress. Hence,
the studies on the purposefully induced tensile stress in order to
Fig. 5. Results of constant-load test of as-received SS304 at 50 C and 80 C with
RH ¼ 35% (datas are from Ref. [53]).
Fig. 6. SCC susceptibility map for the SS304 (Number in parenthesis states number of
specimens cracked/total number of specimens tested) [52].
90 Y. Xie, J. Zhang / Journal of Nuclear Materials 466 (2015) 85e93
force SCC still provide a reasonable and valuable estimation on the
SCC occurrence. This section shows the lab tests on the relation of
residual stress and time of rupture.
SS304 and SS304L which, both at as-received and sensitized
statues, were tested for each applied stress level to obtain a stressrupture time relationship in the SCC test. The rupture time of SS304
(Fig. 7) changed dependening on sap, the higher the stress the
smaller the rupture time, and rupture times of 100 h and 531 h
were obtained for sap of 510 MPa and 147 MPa, respectively. SCC
threshold stress of the corrosion system was 74 MPa, suggesting
that the prevention of SCC was intensely difficult by decreasing
residual stress. The rupture time of as-received and aged conditions
distributed in almost the same region of each type of material, thus
no clear effect of aging (650 C, 10 min). Almost the same tendency
was obtained for SS304L, although the material showed a slight
larger rupture time than SS304 in the higher stress region.
4.5. Sensitization and failure
Sensitization is the precipitation of carbides at grain boundaries
in a SS or alloy, causing material susceptible to intergranular
corrosion or SCC. The heat damage caused by welding process
typically makes chrome carbides form at grain boundaries, and
hence makes grains become depleted in chrome and lose corrosion
resistance. This area is called heat affected zone (HAZ). Besides the
sensitized affect, HAZ has the highest residual stress after welding
because of melting and solidification. HAZ can be narrow, but the
affect cannot be eliminated. Therefore, even water environments
and moist air environments can produce rapid corrosion and
cracking in a sensitized SS, particularly along sensitized grain
boundaries [29].
The tests relating the Three Mile Island (TMI) canisters [61] were
done on the U-bend SS304L specimens in contact with Cl levels of
25e470 ppm, pH values of 7.3e8.1, in contact with tuff rock and
saturated air for a period of 25 months. The sensitized specimens
were shown to be failed by IGSCC.
The test of the stress-rupture time relationship of sensitized
SS304 at 80 C with RH ¼ 35% shows that no clear difference of
rupture times was observed in the higher applied stress region
beyond proof stress, sy (~290 MPa), in comparison to as-received
material (Fig. 8). However, at low applied stress, the rupture time
of sensitized material was much shorter than the as-received. It
suggested the sensitization has more impact on SCC at the residual
stress lower than the proof stress of SS304. For sensitized SS, the
impact on SCC at smaller applied stress was probably lead by the
high residual stress after the sensitization process.
4.6. Localized corrosion potentials
The standard synthetic seawater pH is close to 7 at room temperature. The growth of crack is associated with a decrease of pH at
the crack tip. Some works (e.g. Refs. [62,63]) show that the pH of
solution within a crack or crevice in chloride solution is around 1 to
2. Fig. 9 shows the anodic polarization curves of SS304 and SS316
obtained at 80 C in synthetic seawater of pH 1. The active dissolution current peaks at a potential of approximately 0.25 V were
clear for all SS specimens. Both of the SS304 and SS316 failed
around 500 h by SCC in the test. The coincide of anodic polarization
curves of SS304 and SS316 at the passivate zone and transition zone
showed they had the same pitting potential, indicating they had the
similar tendency of failure.
The localized corrosion potential changes with temperature.
Crevice corrosion potential usually is lower than the pitting potential, for each of the specimens. Fig. 10 displays the relation of
potential and temperature for SS304 and SS316 in the saturated
synthetic seawater. It is shown that the decrease of temperature on
the surface will increase the localized corrosion potential, as well as
the open-circuit potential (OCP). An increase in temperature will
also significantly reduce the amount of dissolved oxygen in the
Fig. 8. Relationship between applied stress and SCC failure time for SS304 sensitized at
650 C for 1 h under the test condition of RH ¼ 35% at 80 C (datas are from Ref. [48]). Fig. 7. Relationship between applied stress and SCC failure time for type SS304 and
SS304L under the test condition of RH ¼ 35% at 80 C (datas are from Ref. [48]).
Fig. 9. Anodic polarization curves obtained in synthetic seawater at 80 C (datas are
from Ref. [41]).
Y. Xie, J. Zhang / Journal of Nuclear Materials 466 (2015) 85e93 91
water on the metal surface and therefore reduce the corrosion
potential of the metal in an environment.
Compared with the anodic polarization curves (Fig. 9), the
measured SS304 pitting potential at 80 C is much lower (the blue
dash line). The data indicates the uncertainty of measurement is
large.
5. Potential uncertainties associated with CISCC occurrence
This article has critically analyzed the segments of published
literatures and theoretical articles of the realistic environmental
conditions on in-service canisters and the CISCC related experimental results of the canister materials. The realistic environmental
conditions on some of the in-service canisters have been measured
and some of them are in progress. However, the data of detection of
CISCC initiation and failure is in short. A multitude of these uncertainties associated with CISCC occurrence are tied to the lack of
observations on the in-service canisters and the difficulties in
making those observations and measurements. While there is a
large amount of experimental data regarding SS SCC, the majority
of them is not applicable to the in-service canister conditions. The
main challenge is not whether CISCC can occur, but identifying if or
when the required parameters exist to initiate CISCC. The mechanisms and interactions, such as the initiation time, propagation
rate, and degradation or complete failure are at low or medium
level of knowledge.
The surface temperatures of in-service canisters were measured
at Calver Cliffs [21], Diablo Canyon and Hope Creek ISFSIs [26],
showing the surface temperature distribution of part of the inservice canisters at a time. While in order to determine when SCC
may initiate, it is crucial to determine the time at which the canister
surface temperature falls below the temperature threshold. Temperatures on the canister surface could significantly vary, depending on the UNF heat loading and temporal weather variations. RHs
on the canister surface are also significantly varied, depending on
the canister surface temperatures and AHs of the atmosphere at
different sites.
The surface deposits of in-service canisters were also measured
at these ISFSIs. The results showed that the surface deposits compositions were more close to the inland rainwater instead of
seawater, and the deposited sea salts concentrations were
extremely low. Existing experimental tests of SSs showed that SCC
was more likely for higher sea salts concentrations. It is likely the
conditions experienced by the canisters were outside the susceptibility range for SCC. However, the limited measurement is not
representative of all the ISFSIs, and the deposit rate with time can
not be estimated through these measurements.
NRC finite element weld residual stress modeling [30] provided
high predicted residual stress distributions. However, little or no
data of actual measurement is available on the residual stress of inservice canisters. Only the data of the 1/5 scale canister models
under natural exposure and accelerated corrosion tests is available
[32]. The actual residual stress of canisters was not typically
calculated or measured before service due to the same fabricator
would change the procedures to make the residual stress widely
varied [15,64]. Besides, most modeling did not consider the residual
stress that may be present from the cold-rolling process, or the
previous welds such as weld repairs that may have occurred prior
to the longitudinal weld; therefore the result can only be a simple
reference.
6. Future work
The segments of published literatures and theoretical articles
show the shortage of data on in-service canisters. Future work for
both experiments and models may focus on the in-service canisters
and observe the corresponding factors of temperature, RH, salts
deposition and residual stress. Specifically, the following research
topics are recommended for future studies: (1) initiation time for
SCC on SS weldment and the effects of pre-existing imperfections
on the SCC initiation and propagation; (2) the deposition rates for
marine salts, dusts, and atmospheric deposits on the canister surfaces and the changes of environment conditions with time; (3)
long-term behaviors of SCC due to environment changes (e.g.,
season changes); (4) residual stress profiles, along with the range of
expected crack growth rates; (5) information on pitting and crevice
corrosion that strongly depends on the changes of conditions; (6)
predictive model development to predict the effects of the environmental conditions on the canister surfaces; (7) the environment
that is needed for localized corrosion initiation for long-term
storage; (8) thermal analysis of the container surface for a variety
of dry canister storage systems.