Abstract
The evaporation cooling process in porous media is significantly influenced by its pore properties, which are essential for understanding thermal transfer behaviors. This study presents a novel approach for determining the pore parameters of porous media, focusing on their influence on the evaporation process. By integrating the pore network model (PNM) with fractal theory, key parameters such as porosity, pore and tortuosity fractal dimension are extracted and a mathematical relationship between these pore parameters and macroscopic evaporative processes is established. Additionally, a 3D irregular surface model, constructed using the Weierstrass-Mandelbrot (W-M) function, is employed to characterize the fractal dimension and height scaling parameter of the pore structure. This study thoroughly investigates in detail the influence of pore fractal dimension and porosity on evaporation process and the evolution of evaporative interface by simulation code. The results demonstrate that the effects of the pore fractal dimension and porosity on parameters of evaporation process are opposite, but both show a decreasing trend in the average height of evaporative interface (RMS value) and an increasing trend in the irregularity (STD value). This work offers valuable insights for the design and optimization of porous materials in applications such as thermal management systems, and stable evaporation technologies, providing a deeper understanding of heat and mass transfer in complex porous media.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Pore network modelFractal theoryPore parametersEvaporative interface
Nomenclature

Heat capacity (J/(kg∙K))
Pore fractal dimension
Tortuosity fractal dimension
Diffusion coefficient of phase 
 (m2/s)
Gravitational acceleration (m2/s)
Height scaling parameter (m)
Evaporative coefficient (m/s)
Intrinsic permeability (m2)
Thermal conductivity (W/(m∙K))
Root mean square (m)
Actual length of the tortuous capillary (m)
Nu	Nusselt number
Pressure (Pa)
Heat flux (J/(m2∙s))
Latent heat (J/kg)
Universal gas constant (J/(mol∙K))
T	Temperature (K)
Velocity vector (m/s)
Volume fraction of phase 
Contact angle (deg)
Pore diameter (m)
Dynamic viscosity of fluid (Pa∙s)
Density of fluid (kg/m3)
Surface tension (N/m)
Tortuosity
Porosity
Subscripts
, in liquid state; 
, in gas state;
1. Introduction
The evaporation process of porous media plays a crucial role in a wide range of engineering fields, including advanced thermal protection systems [[1], [2], [3]], stable evaporation systems [4,5], water resources utilization [6,7], and energy devices such as fuel cells [8,9]. However, the accurate description and prediction of heat and mass transfer of these processes are highly dependent on the characterization of key pore parameters of heterogeneous porous media, such as porosity, pore fractal dimension, and tortuosity fractal dimension [10,11]. These inherent parameters directly govern the transport behavior and heat and mass transfer within porous media [12,13], thereby determining the macroscopic evaporation and flow performance. With the growing demand for high-efficiency heat and mass transfer in next-generation energy and thermal management systems, there is an urgent need to establish a link between microscopic structural characteristics and macroscopic evaporation behavior of porous media.
Traditional studies on evaporation in porous media often rely on continuum-scale models, which treat the medium as a homogeneous material with averaged parameters. These models simplify the intricate pore structure into a uniform medium by averaging key physical properties over a representative elementary volume. While such approaches can capture certain macroscopic behaviors, they often overlook the heterogeneity and complexity of the pore network, thereby resulting in limited predictive accuracy. Such heterogeneity arises from natural formation [14] processes or artificial fabrication [15], leading to significant spatial variations at the pore scale. In particular, the irregularities in pore geometry, connectivity, and tortuosity have significantly impact on the evaporation process, evaporative interface and heat and mass transfer characteristics [16,17], which cannot be adequately represented by overly simplified homogeneous models.
Fractal theory provides a framework for characterizing the irregular and self-similar features of porous structures. Parameters such as pore fractal dimension and tortuosity fractal dimension can quantitatively describe the complexity of pore geometry and transport pathways. Yu et al. [18,19] has successfully developed a comprehensive fractal parameter model for porous media. The use of fractal permeability models can better reveal the flow characteristics inside porous media compared to traditional models [20]. Fractal porous media are also applied in the optimization of various heat sinks to enhance their heat dissipation performance [21,22]. Fractal theory can also be applied to porous media with spherical particles and randomly distributed tree-like branch networks, from which dimensionless permeability and Kozeny Carman (KC) constant can be derived [23]. The fractal permeability model established by Chai et al. [24] coupled with stress sensitivity describes and explains the multiphase flow process in porous media of tight oil reservoirs. Cai and Yu [25] discussed in 1detail the effects of tortuosity on saturated porous media based on the bent capillary tube model and fractal geometry, and obtained a fractal expression for the wetting height. Based on the fluid distribution characteristics and the fractal capillary bundle model, a theoretical model [26] for calculating relative permeability was established. Yang et al. [27] established a pore integral fractal model to characterize the microstructure of porous media, which is meaningful for the design of porous structures and parameter prediction of complex porous media. Xu et al. [28] established pore-scale fractal pore-throat chain model (FPTCM) for non-Darcy flow in isotropic porous media by the statistical fractal scaling law of pore phases. Fractal models can better characterize the randomness of pore size and distribution in fiber porous materials [29]. A fractal model without empirical constants well explains the flow mechanism on a single tortuous capillary with rough surface [30]. The results of Xia et al. [31] show that fractal dimension, lacunarity and succolarity are better at predicting the differences in structure and permeability. Zhu et al. [[32], [33], [34]] also applied fractal theory and established heat and mass transfer models for complex porous structures, which have been used in predicting the physical parameters of porous materials [35].
At present, modeling based on the pore network model (PNM) has become a widely used method for modeling the pore structure and obtain the pore parameters [36]. This model can simulate the fluid invasion in porous media by utilizing concepts such as permeability, diffusivity, and fluid flow in continuous media. The modeling of PNM involves simplifying the pore structure into two spherical pores and cylindrical channels. The pores and channels are then connected throughout the entire region using specific geometric relationships to form a PNM model [37]. Tan et al. [38] used a self-developed pore network simulation algorithm to analyze the heat and moisture transfer process in porous media, providing new ideas for drying optimization. A model using pore-network-continuum model [39] effectively characterizes the single-phase and two-phase flow characteristics in porous media, with good robustness and reliability. A modeling framework for PNM combining conduction, convection and radiation was established to explore the structure-property relationship under different thermal and flow conditions [40]. Giudici et al. [41] proposed a generalized network model that can accurately predict pore-scale displacement and capture the effects of laminar flow on fluid motion. Jin et al. [42,43] established a multi-scale fully coupled method between CFD and PNM and proposed three porous structure design schemes considering the gradient distribution of pore body and pore throat sizes. Combined the boundary conditions generated by PNM with other CFD software [44], it can improve the simulation methods of heat and mass transfer in porous media. Weishaupt et al. [45,46] proposed a coupled conceptual model to simulate evaporative processes at the pore scale, which is particularly suitable for designing and evaluating microscale flow experiments.
Modeling the pore structure and evaporative interface characteristics of porous media still presents many challenges. In this research, based on the PNM and fractal theory of porous media, the parameter characterization of the pore scale is established, including, porosity, permeability, height scaling parameter, and other parameters. Based on the previously work [34], the relationship between the parameters of the PNM and the parameters related to fractal pore media can be established. The study of the effect of fractal parameters on the evaporation in porous media is conducted through an irregular surface with W-M function characteristics on both the top and bottom surfaces. The main calculation logic of this research is shown in Fig. 1. By linking pore parameters to evaporation behavior, this research provides deeper insight into pore-scale transport phenomena and contributes to the development of advanced porous materials for thermal protection, energy conversion and transmission, among others.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (561KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Calculating logic of this research.

2. Model of evaporation and fractal theory
2.1. Evaporation model in porous media
In the case of complex flow in porous media, the governing equations for the flow of a single substance during evaporation are as follows [34]:
(1)
(2)
(3)
In the mass equation Eq. (1), 
 is the density of phase 
; 
 denotes volume fraction of phase 
 in pore; 
 denotes velocity. The signum function has the following relationship where 
 and 
. 
 represents the evaporation coefficient which satisfies the relationship of 
 where 
 is heat flux and 
 denotes latent heat. 
 denotes the saturated pressure which is determined by the saturated temperature and 
 is the universal gas constant. 
 is specific surface area of the evaporative surface, which has been discussed in detail in the previously work [34]. The coefficient of diffusion of liquid 
 can be described by the fractal expression by Liu and Zhu [33], as shown in Eq. (4). The diffusion coefficient of gas 
 in porous media is generally determined by the porosity 
, tortuosity 
, and the molecular diffusion coefficient 
 by Mosthaf et al. [47], as shown in Eq. (5).
(4)
(5)
Here, 
 represents surface tension; 
 represents the contact angle; 
 denotes dynamic viscosity; 
 is pore fractal dimension and 
 is maximum pore diameter. The expression of the tortuosity adopts the theory of Yu [48]:
(6)
In the momentum equation Eq. (2), 
 is curvature; 
 is delta-function and 
 is unit vector normal to the interface. There is a relationship of 
 and 
 at the evaporative interface. 
 is a unit vector in z direction. 
 denotes the intrinsic permeability of the porous medium. In the energy equation Eq. (3), 
, 
 and 
 denote heat capacity of liquid, gas and porous solid. 
 is thermal conductivity of porous medium which is defined as 
 and 
, 
 and 
 are thermal conductivity of liquid, gas and solid. The porous material used in this article is aluminum, which has a wide range of applications in many fields due to its lightweight characteristics.
2.2. Fractal representation of porous media
According to the theory of Yu [19], in porous media satisfying the fractal scaling law, the cumulative number of pores 
 and the tortuous length 
 can be expressed as Eqs. (7), (8), (9), where 
 denotes pore fractal dimension, 
 is tortuosity fractal dimension, 
 is pore diameter and 
 is characteristic length.
(7)
(8)
(9)
When water flows into porous medium, it initially fills the smallest pore, then fills smaller ones and gradually fills larger pores [32]. Therefore, a critical diameter 
 is defined. When the pore diameter is smaller than 
, the pore is completely filled with water, and when the diameter is larger than 
, the pore gradually filled with water. Therefore, it can establish relationship between 
 and 
 as:
(10)
(11)
Volume of liquid 
 and total volume of the pore space 
 can be expressed as:
(12)
(13)
By combining Eq. (13), the fractal expression for the porosity of the entire porous medium can be obtained:
(14)
According to Eq. (14), the characteristic length expression of square porous media can be obtained:
(15)
The porous medium is assumed to be composed of a cluster of capillaries. The pressure difference between two evaporative surfaces is represented by the capillary pressure difference. Fig. 2(a) shows the interface situation in capillary pores of different diameters. Assuming a uniform temperature across the individual pores, the surface tension within each capillary is equal. Based on the capillary where the largest pore diameter is located as Fig. 2(a), the expression of the pressure difference between a capillary of critical diameter and the largest capillary can be expressed:
(16)
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (424KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of the curved liquid level in porous medium.

The capillary satisfies the Hagen-Poiseuille equation, where the flow rate equation of each capillary is Eq. (17). It can be seen from Eqs. (16), (17) that the diameters of each capillary are different, resulting in different flow rates of each capillary.
(17)
When obtaining the total flow rate, current studies usually take the pressure difference 
 in a certain pore as a constant, but it can be concluded from Eq. (16) that its value also varies with the critical pore diameter. Then according to Eq. (17), the total volume flow rate of porous media is obtained by integrating all capillaries:
(18)
During the flow process, the flow in the porous medium is relatively slow, which satisfies the permeability equation described by Darcy's law. When Darcy's law on two interfaces is considered, the critical pore diameter in Eq. (16) is taken as the minimum pore diameter, and the pressure difference between the upper surface and the lower surface is obtained. Combining with the total volume flow expression of Eq. (18), the fractal expression of permeability can be obtained:
(19)
Typically, the diameters of the largest and smallest pores differ by at least two orders of magnitude. Therefore, an assumption can be made that 
, and this value can be substituted into Eqs. (15), (19) to obtain the fractal expression for permeability:
(20)
This expression indicates that the permeability is related to the pore fractal dimension 
, tortuosity fractal dimension 
, porosity 
, and maximum and minimum pore diameters.
2.3. Surface W-M function
Due to the existence of pores, the surface of porous media usually presents an irregular morphology. The studies [33,34] show that irregular surface can affect the evaporative interface, and it can be approximated by the Weierstrass-Mandelbrot function [49,50] to describe the irregular surface of porous medium. The W-M function of irregular surface based on three-dimensional coordinates is expressed as Eq. (21):
(21)
where 
 is the surface fractal dimension which satisfies the relation of 2< 
 <3; 
 is the height scaling parameter; M is the number of overlapping ridges; 
 represents the wave number which is related to the sampling length, where 
 is the sampling length; 
 represents the spatial frequency of the contour curve, where 
 is a constant which is greater than one and 
 stands for rank. For the surface following normal distribution, 
 represents the direction of the wave corresponding to m on the surface. 
 is a uniformly distributed random phase with values within the range of (0,2π).
The root mean square roughness of irregular surface [51] formed by W-M function is expressed as Eq. (22) in Fig. 2(b).
(22)
 is the lower limit cut-off frequency, which is determined by the maximum pore diameter. Upper cut-off frequency 
 is related to the critical diameter. Root mean square roughness 
 also can be determined by the liquid capillary motion from the maximum to the critical pore size as Fig. 2(a). In capillaries, because of the connect between large pores and small pores, the length of the flow channel 
 can be determined by the maximum and criticalpore sizes in Fig. 2(a) and (b). By combining Eq. (16), Hagen-Poiseuille law as Eq. (17) and 
 , it can be obtained the value of 
 as Eq. (23). Here, 
 indicates the macroscopic external relationship of flow rate in capillary tubes, while 
 in Eq. (17) calculates the flow rate from the perspective of the microscopic flow mechanism of a capillary tube. At the same time, the evaporation process in porous media is often closely related to external macroscopic conditions. Thus, the relationship between macroscopic scale and microscopic flow parameters is established by 
.
(23)
where 
 is average velocity in a capillary which can be obtained by evaporative coefficient 
. Using Eq. (9), a relationship between 
 and 
 can be established as 
. Combine Eq. (22) and Eq. (23), it can be obtained the expression for 
:
(24)
Liu and Zhu [33] derived a relationship as Eqs. (25), (26) between the surface fractal dimension 
 of W-M function and the pore fractal dimension 
 through the distribution of maximum and minimum pores in porous media.
(25)
(26)
Through the above derivation, the relationship between the parameters of the irregular surface and the fractal pore parameters can be established. The control process of heat and mass transfer by fractal dimension is mainly reflected in: (a) parameters in the governing equations, such as 
, 
, and K; (2) parameters G and D of irregular surface function.
2.4. PNM model and verification
As can be seen from the above model, the basis for solving these equations lies in obtaining the parameters (
, 
) of porous media. Previous methods for obtaining fractal dimensions were box counting method based on 2D images of pore characteristics (usually obtained by scanning electron microscopy), but this might often overlook the 3D pore features. This research adopts the pore network model (PNM) to generate heterogenous and complex 3D porous media, and the characteristic parameters of the pore structure were obtained by the box counting method for the 3D pore structure. The porosity, pore number distribution and maximum and minimum pore diameters can be measured by mercury injection instrument on an actual porous medium sample. The pore distribution of the PNM is calculated based on the results of mercury injection instrument to obtain the above parameters, and numerical experiments are performed to obtain the permeability 
 and 
 for comparison with the results of fractal modeling in Eq. (20).
The pore structure of porous media is assumed to be a spherical pore shape, and the channels between the pores are assumed to be cylindrical in PNM, as shown in Fig. 3. The diameter of each pore is determined by the results of mercury injection instrument, while the position of each pore is determined by the convex hull generated by the three-dimensional Voronoi algorithm. A more detailed description of the PNM model can be found in the application of generating pore structures [36,52] or in some open-source tools [53,54]. Different numbers of convex hulls can be used to generate porous media with different porosities by open-source software OpenPNM [53], as shown in Fig. 3. As porosity rises, both the number of pores and throats increase and the structure becomes more complex. Additionally, by calculating the Darcy equation in the PNM model and injecting liquid mercury at a certain pressure on the lower surface to simulate the seepage process [55], the pressure distribution of each pore and throat within the porous media can be obtained. In this context, deeper red indicates higher pressure values. It can be observed that the pressure is higher at the bottom of the porous media, gradually decreasing during the liquid injection process, creating a pressure difference between the upper and lower surfaces of the porous media.
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (2MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. The PNM structures with different porosities.

The pore distribution under these four different porosities conditions was statistically analyzed as shown in Fig. 4. It can be seen that the pore diameters follow a fractal distribution as Eq. (7), ranging from 0 to 2.5 × 10−6 m, with an average diameter of approximately 1.1 × 10−6 m. For all porosity (
 = 0.0108, 0.0960, 0.1563, 0.2247), the throat diameter is nearly normal distributed, with values an order of magnitude smaller than the pore diameter, around 1.0 × 10−7 m, which is consistent with reality. The majority of throat lengths are within the range of 0–1.0 × 10−5 m.
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Quantitative statistics of pore diameter, throat diameter, and throat length with different porosities.

From the pore diameter distribution described above, data on the log distribution of pore diameter and quantity can be extracted. Meanwhile, using the box counting method and linear fitting, the pore fractal dimension 
 can be obtained. As shown in Fig. 5, it can be observed that as the porosity changes, the 
 of this porous structure grows to 2.3. By substituting these values into Eqs. (25), (26), the surface fractal dimension 
 can be obtained, and following calculations are based on this method for the conversion of two fractal dimensions.
Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (647KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Logarithmic statistics of pore diameter and quantity are performed with different porosities.

The permeability and tortuosity fractal dimension can be obtained through numerical platform experiments. For the calculation of the tortuosity [56] and tortuosity fractal dimension, its definition equation can be used:
(27)
(28)
where 
 is diffusivity of fluid which is the property. The effective diffusion coefficient 
 can be determined by molar flow rate 
 and concentration difference 
 as 
. Using the OpenPNM [53], Fickian diffusion was implemented to simulate experiments with mercury liquids of different concentrations on the upper and lower surfaces to obtain 
 and 
. By obtaining the effective diffusion coefficient, the reference value for tortuosity can be calculated using Eq. (27). Substituting this value into Eq. (28), the tortuosity fractal dimension 
 can be determined. Conducting Stokes numerical flow experiments allows for the determination of the permeability of the three-dimensional porous structure by Darcy's law, 
. The lower surface serves as the inlet for mercury at room temperature, with a given pressure value, while the upper surface acts as the outlet. The pressure distribution of the entire structure can be obtained, as depicted in Fig. 3. By utilizing the obtained pressure difference data and applying Darcy's law, the permeability of the porous medium can be calculated.
Additionally, to verify the accuracy of the aforementioned theory, the obtained pore fractal dimension and tortuosity fractal dimension are substituted into Eq. (20) to calculate the permeability as shown in Table 1. The permeability of three different porous media (made of sintered metal particles) was measured simultaneously in mercury injection instrument and compared with the results of OpenPNM and fractal equation as Eq. (20). It can be seen that the permeability values obtained by using OpenPNM, the fractal equation, and the mercury intrusion meter are close, and the errors of the fractal equation and the mercury intrusion meter are between 0.44 % and 2.21 %. This demonstrates that the proposed theory is capable of modeling porous media accurately.
Table 1. The fractal parameters of structures.

Permeability, (m2)	Error
OpenPNM	Eq. (20)	Mercury injection instrument
0.0108	3.15	1.13	2.12	3.71 × 10−9	3.60 × 10−9	–	–
0.0960	3.19	1.26	2.19	6.84 × 10−8	6.63 × 10−8	6.78 × 10−8	2.21 %
0.1563	3.28	1.33	2.24	2.52 × 10−7	2.53 × 10−7	2.56 × 10−7	1.17 %
0.2247	3.32	1.37	2.30	6.83 × 10−7	6.81 × 10−7	6.84 × 10−7	0.44 %
2.5. Simulation model and experiment verification
Based on the aforementioned theory, a porous medium with dimensions of (10 mm, 10 mm, 5 mm) is chosen as the computational model as shown on the left of Fig. 1. The W-M function on the top and bottom surfaces, except for the random numbers, shares the same fractal dimension D and height scaling parameter G. The top surface is the outlet and is set to a high temperature with a value of 700 K. The bottom surface serves as the inlet for the cooling water, with mass flow rate of 0.1 kg/s and temperature of 300 K. The four lateral sides are set as symmetric boundary conditions. A fourth-order compact finite volume method in three spatial directions and a third-order Runge-Kutta in time are used for discrete calculations by code [57,58].
To verify that the simulation results are independent of grid resolution, three sets of structured grids are generated, containing approximately 1.3 × 106, 2.2 × 106, 3.7 × 106, respectively, which are locally refined near the upper and lower surfaces. In addition, to assess the reliability of the numerical algorithm, the temperature distribution along the Z-axis is extracted and compared with experimental results [34], as shown in Fig. 6. The simulated results show good agreement with the experimental results, with only minor deviations observed near the lower surface. In contrast, in the region near the upper surface where the temperature changes sharply, the simulation closely reproduces the experimental trend. The results obtained from the three grid configurations are nearly identical, with only slight differences appearing near the upper surface. Considering the balance between computational accuracy and efficiency, the grid with 2.2 × 106 is adopted for subsequent simulations.
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (335KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Verification of grid independence and comparison of experimental results and simulations.

3. Results and discussion
By varying the pore fractal dimension 
 (2.1–2.6) and porosity 
 (0.05–0.6), values of temperature, vapor volume fraction, velocity, and Nusselt number can be obtained to investigate the influence of these two factors on evaporation process and evaporative interface within the porous medium.
3.1. The effect of pore fractal dimension
As the pore fractal dimension 
 increases while keeping the porosity constant, the surface irregularity intensifies from Fig. 7(a). Due to the extremely high temperature on the top surface and the ambient temperature of the water inlet on the bottom surface, intense evaporation occurs near the top surface, and the evaporative interface is located at a certain position within the medium. Due to the relatively slow flow within the porous medium, the isothermal surface at 375.15 K is approximately regarded as the evaporative interface. As the 
 increases from 2.1 to 2.6, it can be observed that the evaporative interface (isothermal surface in 373.15 K) gradually moves upward, particularly more prominently for fractal dimensions larger than 2.4. This is because an increased pore fractal dimension leads to enhanced surface irregularity, resulting in a more irregular temperature distribution on the top surface. Therefore, evaporation is more intense and temperatures are higher near the top surface. The irregularity in the distribution of isothermal surface also becomes more pronounced as the fractal dimension increases, as depicted in Fig. 7(b).
Fig. 7
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Temperature distribution with variation of 
 = 2.1–2.6: (a) cross sections, (b)iso-surface.

At the middle position of the porous medium (5 mm, 5 mm, Z), the temperature distribution along the Z-axis is extracted as shown in Fig. 8. The temperature distribution at the bottom surface appears relatively uniform. The top surface of the porous medium with a larger pore fractal dimension exhibits higher temperatures. This trend does not follow a clear linear relationship, as the variation in temperature with different pore fractal dimensions is not pronounced. Nonetheless, it can be observed that the temperature is lower at 
 = 2.2 and higher at 
 = 2.6. This behavior arises from the influence of irregular surface morphology, where the degree of surface irregular along the data extraction line differs with the pore fractal dimension, leading to an inconspicuous temperature trend. Therefore, analyzing data along a single line is insufficient and may be biased by geometric effects; instead, the average value across the entire top surface should be further evaluated.
Fig. 8
Download: Download high-res image (493KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Temperature distribution in the vertical direction with variation of 
 = 2.1–2.6.

As discussed earlier, the pore fractal dimension 
 leads to irregular morphologies on both the upper and lower surfaces, thereby influencing the vapor volume fraction. The contour plot in Fig. 9(a) shows a trend consistent with the temperature field, indicating that a higher pore fractal dimension shifts the evaporative interface upward. In addition, the irregular surface morphology affects not only the position but also the shape of the evaporative interface. The interface where vapor first forms exhibits a similar pattern to that where the vapor volume fraction exceeds 0.5, but both differ from the top and bottom surfaces. Fig. 9(b) illustrates the increased irregularity of the vapor volume fraction on the top surface. When 
 = 2.6, the distribution on the top surface becomes more irregular, with a broader range of higher values. In Fig. 10, the vapor volume fraction near the top surface increases with the pore fractal dimension, further confirming that higher fractal dimensions enhance evaporation capacity and increase vapor content on the top surface. However, this trend is less evident in the region of Z = 0.0035–0.0045 m, where the variation does not follow a clear linear pattern. This behavior is attributed to variations in surface irregularity on the upper and lower surfaces caused by changes in the pore fractal dimension.
Fig. 9
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Vapor volume fraction distribution with variation of 
 = 2.1–2.6: (a) cross sections, (b)iso-surface.

Fig. 10
Download: Download high-res image (381KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 10. Vapor volume fraction distribution in the vertical direction with variation of 
 = 2.1–2.6.

From Fig. 11(a), it is evident that when 
 = 2.1, the velocity near the top surface is relatively high. As the pore fractal dimension 
 increases, the velocity at the top surface slightly decreases, while the velocity in the convex regions of the bottom surface shows a more pronounced reduction. This can be explained as follows: under the same coolant mass flow rate, stronger disturbances occur in the convex regions of the bottom surface, leading to more intense evaporation at the top surface. Consequently, additional liquid supply from the bottom surface is required, resulting in lower velocity in these regions. Fig. 11(b) displays the velocity iso-surfaces, where the bottom surface exhibits a “nest” structure, whereas the top surface shows a fragmented and sheet-like shapes. This occurs because the resistance to liquid flow within the porous medium is higher than that to vapor. As a result, the liquid at the bottom forms “nest” centered around irregular positions, driven by the combined effects of inlet pressure and internal resistance within the porous medium. In contrast, above the evaporative interface, the velocity variation within the same horizontal plane is relatively small, giving rise to the fragmented structure of the velocity iso-surfaces. As shown in Fig. 12, the velocity at the top surface increases slightly with the pore fractal dimension. However, this trend is not significant and is influenced by the degree of irregular morphology at the corresponding location.
Fig. 11
Download: Download high-res image (2MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 11. Velocity distribution with variation of 
 = 2.1–2.6: (a) cross sections, (b)iso-surface.

Fig. 12
Download: Download high-res image (392KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 12. Velocity distribution in the vertical direction with variation of 
 = 2.1–2.6.

The aforementioned results only discuss the distribution trends in cross-sections, iso-surface and vertical lines. To fully assess the heat and mass transfer performance of the porous media, it is necessary to consider the average values of various quantities on the more intensely evaporating top surface. Eqs. (29), (30), (31) are used to calculate the average temperature and average Nusselt number on the top surface. Taking into account the varying height 
 at the center points of each cell, the heights of the top and bottom surfaces need to be determined based on their positions. The same processing method is applied to subsequent variables.
(29)
(30)
(31)
Fig. 13 presents the average results of temperature, Nusselt number, vapor volume fraction, and velocity on the top surface for the six different pore fractal dimensions 
. As the 
 increases, the average temperature on the top surface gradually decreases, but the change in temperature is not significant, with a difference of approximately 1 K. Additionally, the average Nusselt number raises, with a clear upward trend. This is consistent with previous conclusions, where an increase in the pore fractal dimension leads to a more irregular surface and more intense evaporation. The regulation of the evaporative interface by irregular surfaces is reflected in two aspects: (1) Firstly, different irregular surfaces have different D, and D can further determine the 
. The value of 
 directly regulates the parameters of fluid flow and evaporation processes in the control equations, such as 
, 
 and K. (2) Secondly, different irregular surfaces directly affect the geometric morphology characteristics of the bottom and top surfaces, serving as boundary conditions to control the morphology and position of the evaporative interface.
Fig. 13
Download: Download high-res image (388KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 13. The variation of average temperature, Nusselt number, vapor and velocity on the top with different 
.

Therefore, in thermal protection technologies using porous media such as transpiration cooling, irregular surfaces demonstrate better cooling performance, resulting in lower top surface temperatures and enhanced convective heat transfer, which increases the Nusselt number. However, the average vapor volume fraction and velocity on the top surface reduce. Based on results along a single vertical line, the average vapor volume fraction and velocity grow to varying degrees with increasing pore fractal dimension. But it depends on the position of the line, especially whether its upper endpoint is located at a concave or convex point of the top surface. When considering the average values, as the pore fractal dimension enhances, the evaporative interface shifts upward, resulting in a relatively lower vapor volume fraction at the top surface, which slightly diminishes the average velocity. This also confirms that the position and shape of the evaporative interface affect the thermal protection performance.
3.2. The effect of porosity
In the above discussion, the porosity is fixed, and the effect of different pore fractal dimensions on the evaporation is discussed. The following section will fix 
 to discuss the influence of porosity 
 = 0.05–0.6 on the results of evaporation. Since the flow field changes slightly when the porosity 
 is in the range of 0.05–0.1, only the results for porosity 
 = 0.1–0.6 are shown below. The results for 
 = 0.05–0.1 are only used to compare the changes in upper surface and the evaporative interface.
In Fig. 14, it is evident that as the porosity increases, the evaporative interface becomes progressively more irregular, and the temperature near the top surface in the temperature contour map rises significantly. In particular, at a porosity of 
 = 0.6, the temperature on the top surface is higher, and the irregularity of the highest iso-surface intensifies. This suggests that increased porosity leads to a rise in temperature in the upper half of the porous medium, allowing the higher temperatures at the top surface to penetrate more easily into the interior of the porous medium, which in turn causes the evaporative interface to move downward. Similarly, in Fig. 15, the growth of porosity is associated with higher temperatures and a downward shift in the evaporative interface. As a result, the temperature at the top surface stabilizes around 700 K, thereby reducing the effectiveness of the thermal protection.
Fig. 14
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 14. Temperature distribution with variation of 
 = 0.1–0.6: (a) cross sections, (b)iso-surface.

Fig. 15
Download: Download high-res image (446KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 15. Temperature distribution in the vertical direction with variation of 
 = 0.1–0.6.

Similarly, in the vapor volume fraction, enhancement of the porosity 
 leads to higher temperatures on the top surface, resulting in more intense evaporation near the top surface and a corresponding increase in vapor volume fraction, as shown in Fig. 16. The irregularity of the vapor iso-surface also raises with the variation of the evaporative interface. When the porosity is low, the location where vapor begins to be generated is close to the upper surface. As the porosity increases, the evaporative interface begins to move downwards towards the middle position, and the vapor region above the evaporative interface becomes thicker (only the vapor range of 0.02–0.58 is listed in the figure). At lower porosities, the irregularity of iso-surface in Fig. 16(b) is influenced by the rough morphology near the top surface, which causes the iso-surface to exhibit a fragmented, sheet-like structure. At higher porosities, the iso-surface near the top surface becomes a continuous and irregular surface. In Fig. 17, the vapor volume fraction grows significantly with the increase in porosity, and this upward trend persists toward the top surface. Moreover, the vapor volume fraction gradient at the top surface becomes steeper as porosity increases, particularly at 
 = 0.1, where the vapor volume fraction gradient is more pronounced.
Fig. 16
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 16. Vapor volume fraction distribution with variation of 
 = 0.1–0.6: (a) cross sections, (b)iso-surface.

Fig. 17
Download: Download high-res image (359KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 17. Vapor volume fraction distribution in the vertical direction with variation of 
 = 0.1–0.6.

As the porosity 
 increases, the velocity near the top surface also grows, as shown in Fig. 18. In Fig. 19, the velocity below the evaporative interface shows a relatively uniform increase with porosity (except for 
 = 0.3). In the equation for water flow, 
, the effective area 
 must be corrected for porosity, i.e., 
, allowing the average velocity 
 to be expressed as 
. However, in Fig. 19, it is observed that the total velocity of water below the evaporative interface increases with porosity. This suggests that although 
 decreases with decreasing porosity, both 
 and 
 increase significantly, leading to more complex and intense flow within the porous medium “nest”. For the velocity of vapor, the increased temperature near the top surface due to higher porosity facilitates the diffusion of vapor within the porous medium (as described by Eq. (5)), thereby increasing its velocity. However, when 
 = 0.6, this trend reverses near the outlet. Due to the complexity of the porous medium, this variation remains intricate, making it a key focus for future research.
Fig. 18
Download: Download high-res image (2MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 18. Velocity distribution with variation of 
 = 0.1–0.6: (a) cross sections, (b)iso-surface.

Fig. 19
Download: Download high-res image (437KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 19. Velocity distribution in the vertical direction with variation of 
 = 0.1–0.6.

In the previous discussion of this section, the porosity range is between 0.1 and 0.6. To investigate the trend within a smaller porosity range, the computational results for the top surface with porosities of 
 = 0.05–0.1 are included for comparison, as shown in Fig. 20. As porosity increases, the average temperature on the top surface rises, and the average Nusselt number gradually reduces; however, this trend weakens when the porosity exceeds 0.2. The average vapor volume fraction enlarges and exhibits nearly linear relationships at both ends of the porosity ranges 
 = 0.05–0.2 and 
 = 0.2–0.6. The average velocity reaches its maximum value of approximately 2.17 m/s at 
 = 0.3. As porosity increases, the volume occupied by pores within the porous medium grows, raising permeability and enhancing convective heat transfer. However, because the Nusselt number is less than 1, heat conduction dominates the heat transfer process. As porosity increases, the contact area for heat conduction reduces accordingly. Under the combined effects of convection and conduction, the average temperature on the top surface rises, while the Nusselt number decreases.
Fig. 20
Download: Download high-res image (380KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 20. The variation of average temperature, Nusselt number, vapor and velocity on the top with different porosity.

The properties of the evaporative interface are also important for the study of phase change within porous media. By extracting data from the iso-surface at 373.15 K, the evaporative interface diagram and the trends of RMS (root mean square) and STD (standard deviation) values are obtained, as shown in Fig. 21. The RMS value can represent the average height of the evaporative interface, and the STD value can measure the irregularity of the evaporative interface. The RMS and STD values are calculated using the following equations:
(32)
(33)
In Fig. 21, as the pore fractal dimension 
 increases, the RMS value gradually reduces, while the STD value enlarges. This indicates that the average height of the evaporative interface is moving downward. However, the increased irregularity of the top and bottom surfaces leads to enhanced irregularity of the evaporative interface (as reflected by the STD value), especially when the pore fractal dimension exceeds 2.5. Similarly, as porosity increases, the RMS value reduces, and the STD value enlarges. While the irregularity of the top and bottom surfaces remains consistent, the growth of porosity reduces the effective contact area within the porous medium, diminishing its impact on evaporation. Therefore, with increasing porosity, the average height of the evaporative interface shifts downward, and the irregularity of the interface intensifies. The range of variation is relatively small when the porosity is less than one. Porosity around one is the critical value at which significant differences occur between the flow parameters and the evaporative interface in this study, which is caused by the degree of variation in seepage and flow channels [59].
Fig. 21
Download: Download high-res image (977KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 21. Topography of evaporative interface (373.15 K) and RMS and STD values under different conditions, (a) line diagram of evaporative interface with different 
; (b) RMS value and STD value of evaporative interface with different 
; (c) line diagram of the evaporative interface with different 
; (d) RMS and STD values of the evaporative interface with different 
.

4. Conclusion
In this study, PNM structure is employed to model the porous media and obtain the fractal dimension, while the W-M function is used to characterize the surface of complex porous media. Numerical simulations are conducted to investigate the influence of fractal dimension and porosity on heat and mass transfer, as well as on the evaporative interface. The main conclusions are as follows.
(1)
An evaporative heat transfer model is established within complex porous media using the two-phase flow control equations. The PNM structure is employed to approximate complex porous media. Fractal expressions for flow rate and permeability are theoretically derived and corrected based on the capillary properties within individual pore. Porosity and pore fractal dimension are obtained from the distribution of pore diameters, and tortuosity fractal dimension and permeability are determined through simulations of Fickian diffusion and Stokes flow. The modeling of the PNM structure and fractal theory shows good agreement with the results of mercury injection instrument, validating its reliability.
(2)
In the simulation of evaporation within complex porous media using the W-M function, the effects of fractal dimension and porosity on temperature, vapor volume fraction, velocity, Nusselt number, and the evaporative interface are investigated. The iso-surface of temperature and vapor exhibit fragmented and sheet-like shapes. Under the combined effect of flow rate and resistance of porous media, the velocity field below the evaporative interface forms a “nest” structure. As the fractal dimension rises, the average temperature, average vapor volume fraction, and velocity on the upper surface reduce, while the Nusselt number enlarges. The evaporative interface gradually moves downward and becomes more irregular, with a significant variation in STD values, but a smaller range of variation in RMS values.
(3)
The variation in porosity has an opposite effect on the flow field. As the porosity grows, the average temperature, Nusselt number and average vapor volume fraction enhances, while the velocity reaches the maximum at 
 = 0.3. The variation trend of the evaporative interface with porosity follows that of the fractal dimension. However, with a growth in porosity, the range of variation in STD values is smaller, while the range of variation in RMS values is larger. However, when the porosity is less than 0.1, the changes in these parameters are not obvious.
These conclusions suggest that for porous media applied in thermal protection, larger fractal dimensions and lower porosity should be considered to reduce the surface temperature. For applications requiring stable evaporation, both the fractal dimension and porosity should be minimized.