Background
Dynamic compressive strength (DCS) of frozen rocks is significant in improving the impact design of rock engineering in cold regions. However, the existing dynamic low temperature testing systems generally cannot achieve a controllable cooling rate or maintain a stable freezing temperature environment, which induces undesirable damage in rocks due to the rapid cooling rate and leads to inaccurate measurement results.

Objective
The objective of this study is to develop a valid dynamic low temperature testing system capable of testing frozen rocks and investigate the effect of ambient sub-zero temperature on the dynamic compressive behaviors of rocks.

Methods
The T2 spectrums obtained by NMR (Nuclear Magnetic Resonance) of two freezing conditions are adopted to prove the necessity of ambient sub-zero temperature for dynamic tests of frozen rocks. A valid dynamic low temperature testing system is developed to perform the dynamic rock test under the ambient sub-zero temperature of dry and saturated white sandstone specimens at 20 °C, -10 °C, and -20 °C. The DCSs (dynamic compressive strength) of dry and saturated porous white sandstones at 20 °C, -10 °C, and -20 °C are obtained and compared.

Results
The dynamic low temperature testing system is valid for performing the dynamic rock test under ambient sub-zero temperature and capturing the dynamic failure process of frozen rock specimens. At 20 °C, -10 °C, and -20 °C, the DCSs of dry sandstones are higher than those of saturated sandstones, and the sub-zero temperature has a different influence on the DCSs of dry and saturated sandstones, indicating that both the phase transition of water and the shrinkage of minerals contribute to the DCS deterioration.

Conclusions
Ambient sub-zero temperature of dynamic testing frozen rocks is necessary to evaluate the significant temperature influence on the dynamic compressive behavior of sandstone.

Explore related subjects
Discover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning.
Cryospheric Science
Earth Sciences
Low Temperature Physics
Low Temperature Plasma
Structural Geology
Geotechnical Engineering and Applied Earth Sciences
Introduction
An increasing number of underground geotechnical engineering projects have been proposed to construct in high-latitude or high-elevation regions, in which the temperature could statistically be belo w 0 °C for many years. Meanwhile, the frozen depth in these regions can reach about several hundred meters, i.e., 312 m in the Fenghuo Mt. region at Qinghai-Tibet Plateau [1] and 900 m in Arctic Canada [2]. Extensive studies have indicated that both sub-zero temperature and water content have important effects on the physical and mechanical properties of rock-like materials [2,3,4,5]. The effect of sub-zero temperature on sandstones has been widely studied due to the porous properties of sandstones. For instance, with the decrease in the sub-zero temperature, the quasi-static mechanical parameters (e.g., the compressive strength and the tensile strength) of frozen dry and saturated sandstones increase significantly [5,6,7,8]. Also, the quasi-static compressive strength, the elastic modulus, and the fracture toughness of saturated rocks at sub-zero temperatures are generally higher than those of dry rocks [5,6,7, 9]. These results suggested that the pore ice considerably enhances the mechanical properties of frozen rocks. Nevertheless, the frost heave of pore water in rocks generally induces considerable and irreparable damage (e.g., pores and cracks) in rock skeleton due to the high frost heaving force up to 207 MPa and the water content has a great influence on the frost heaving deformation and damage of rocks [5, 10]. In quasi-static loading conditions, the enhancement of pore ice can overwhelm the frost damage on the rock skeleton and the mechanical properties of frozen rocks increase when the temperature decreases. In addition, the existing studies revealed that the irreversible residual freezing strain of fully saturated sandstones at sub-zero temperatures is significantly higher than that of dry ones [11, 12].

As mentioned above, previous studies mostly focused on the quasi-static mechanical behavior of frozen rocks. Currently, with the dramatic development of civil and military rock engineering in cold areas, the frozen rocks are prone to dynamically fail or damage due to blasting and earthquake. Therefore, it is of great significance to understand the dynamic mechanical properties of frozen rocks. The cooling methods proposed in the existing studies for investigating the dynamic mechanical properties of frozen rocks by using the split Hopkinson pressure bar (SHPB) can be categorized into two types. The first type is a quick test method, in which the specimens were first frozen in a freezer and then tested at room temperature in the laboratory [13,14,15]. This method did not consider the melting in the contact surface between the specimens and the bars and the melting of the frozen rock specimen during the entire test period. The other method is to use a liquid nitrogen cooling technology to achieve the sub-zero temperature during the dynamic rock tests [13, 14, 16, 17]. The uncontrollable cooling rate and the unstable state of sub-zero ambient temperature in the liquid nitrogen cooling technology could induce severe damage in frozen rocks because of the thermal shock due to the high cooling rate [18,19,20]. Furthermore, liquid nitrogen cooling generally causes damage to the microstructure of rocks even if at room temperature [21]. Therefore, it is necessary to perform dynamic frozen rock experiments under a controllable cooling rate and a stable sub-zero temperature for measuring the accurate dynamic mechanical properties of frozen rocks. In this study, we proposed a valid dynamic low temperature testing system capable of testing frozen rock under a controllable cooling rate and an in-situ stable sub-zero temperature. Also, dynamic compression tests for frozen rocks are conducted by using this system to study the influence of the ambient sub-zero temperature on the dynamic compressive strength of dry and saturated white sandstone.

Principle of Dynamic Low Temperature Testing System
In the existing dynamic experiments for frozen rocks, rock specimens frozen for 24 h were generally tested at ambient room temperature due to the limitation of the existing dynamic testing system [15, 22, 23]. In these dynamic experiments on frozen rocks, the rock specimens were first kept in a freezing chamber for more than 24 h. Thereafter, the specimens were directly assembled into the dynamic testing system and tested at the room temperature (18 ~ 20 °C). Although the assembly and the dynamic experiment for frozen rock specimens can usually be completed within 100 s, the influence of thermal diffusion on the measurement of dynamic frozen rock properties cannot be ignored since the considerable difference between the specimen temperature and the ambient temperature.

To determine the thermal diffusion effect, the contents of unfrozen water in rock specimens frozen for 24 h were compared with that of the same frozen rock specimen exposed to room temperature (20 °C) for 100 s. The unfrozen water in rock was examined by using NMR (Nuclear Magnetic Resonance) technology. An environmental chamber was installed in the coil of the NMR (Model MacroMR12-150H-1) device to provide a uniform sub-zero temperature environment [24]. Six samples with similar wave velocity and porosity were fully saturated and then frozen in two conditions: -10 °C (Specimen No. A1-A3) for 24 h and -20 °C (Specimen No. B1-B3) for 24 h (Table 1). On the one hand, the T2 spectrums of all six specimens frozen in the sub-zero temperature environmental chamber for 24 h were recorded in real-time. On the other hand, the T2 spectrums of these six frozen rock specimens after the exposure to room temperature for 100 s were detected to mimic the period for completing the assembly and the dynamic experiment for frozen rock in previous studies. The average T2 spectrums of -10 °C and -20 °C conditions are shown in Fig. 1(a). The specimen under 20℃ mainly has bulk water and capillary water. With the decrease of the low temperature, adsorbed water is dominant in the frozen specimen. Furthermore, it is clear that the T2 distributions of frozen rock specimens under both -10 °C and -20 °C are obviously different from those of the corresponding rock specimens after exposing to room temperature for 100 s, indicating that the unfrozen water content in the rock specimen significantly varies even if the frozen rock specimen is just placed in the ambient room temperature for 100 s. In addition, the relative content of unfrozen water in rock specimens can be calculated by the signals of free induction decay (FID) [8, 25]:

(1)
where Sw is the normalized content of unfrozen water in a specimen; FIDfrozen is the value of the specimens frozen at a given sub-zero temperature; FIDsaturated is the corresponding value of the saturated specimen when the water is not frozen at the given sub-zero temperature. The temperature vs. T2 spectral area is plotted in Fig. 1(b). The paramagnetic regression line in the above-zero temperature region was extended to the sub-zero temperature. Thus, FIDfrozen is the measured signal at the given sub-zero temperature, and FIDsaturated is the corresponding value at the extended line of the paramagnetic regression line under the same sub-zero temperature. Finally, the normalized content of unfrozen water (Sw) in the specimens can obtain based on equation (1). The details for determining the values of FIDfrozen and FIDsaturated can be found in the reference [25]. The history of the average relative-contents of unfrozen water in a typical rock specimen is illustrated in Fig. 1(c). Under the sub-zero temperature, the relative ice content decreases logarithmically from almost 1 to 0. When the temperature is higher than zero, the content of unfrozen water is almost constant in the rock specimen. Moreover, the unfrozen water contents of six rock specimens are given in Table 1. It can be seen that due to temperature difference, the content of the unfrozen water remarkedly changes in those six specimens after being exposed at room temperature for 100 s. It reveals the increase of the unfrozen water content in the rock specimen due to the melting of ice crystals associated with the thermal diffusion. The unfrozen water content significantly affects the mechanical properties of rock and soil, the frost heaving deformation of pore water, and the amplitude of frost heaving pressure [26]. Therefore, it is necessary to conduct dynamic frozen-rock experiments without changing the temperature environment during the entire experimental process, avoiding the impact of the variation of unfrozen water content on the accuracy of measurement results.

Table 1 Unfrozen water content Sr in two freezing conditions
Full size table
Fig. 1
figure 1
a NMR signal intensity-T2 spectrum of two typical specimens; b FID signal amplitude at different temperatures; c The relative water content of a typical specimen under ambient different temperatures

Full size image
In this study, a dynamic low temperature testing system capable of testing frozen rock under a controllable cooling rate and an in-situ stable sub-zero temperature is proposed. This system is mainly composed of a traditional split Hopkinson pressure bar (SHPB) system and a real-time sub-zero-temperature device (Fig. 2). The traditional SHPB system consists of a striker, an incident bar, a transmitted bar, and an absorption device. All the bars with a diameter of 50 mm are made of 7075 aluminum. The length of the striker, the incident, and transmitted bars are 285 mm, 3000 mm, and 1800 mm, respectively. A pair of strain gauges are glued on the surfaces of the incident and transmitted bars, respectively. The incident, reflected and transmitted waves are recorded by an oscilloscope through the strain gauges and the amplifier. Further, the pulse shaping technique suggested by the International Society for Rock Mechanics and Rock Engineering (ISRM) was adopted to produce the sinusoidal incident waves in the SHPB experiments [27]. The pulse shapers are made of the rubber discs with the thickness of 3 mm and the diameter of 20.5 mm/22 mm. The diameters of the pulse shapers are designed for different loading rates, i.e., 20.5 mm for low loading rates and 22 mm for high loading rates. The striker first impacts the pulse shaper, and the incident wave in the incident bar is then modified from a rectangular shape to a sinusoidal shape due to the deformation of the rubber disc. In addition, the self-developed real-time sub-zero-temperature device with a precise temperature control system is installed complementary to the SHPB system to simulate ambient sub-zero temperature. This device includes an in-situ environmental chamber and a master control device (Fig. 2). Two holes, whose diameter is slightly larger than that of the bars, are drilled on two sides of the environmental chamber. As shown in Fig. 2, the incident and transmitted bars go through these two holes, and thus the specimen sandwiched between two bars can be hold in the environmental chamber to be frozen to the desired temperature. The environmental chamber and the master control device are connected through a signal line and two pipes. The signal line is used to provide the control circuit for the connection between the temperature sensor in the environmental chamber and the control system in the master control device. The two pipes with insulation are used to exchange the air between the environmental chamber and the master control device during the cooling process. The master control device is mainly composed of a water tank, a compressor, a condenser, an evaporator, a controller, and a refrigerant. The gaseous refrigerant is transmitted into the condenser by the compressor, and then the gaseous refrigerant is transmitted into liquid in the compressor. The liquid refrigerant is delivered to the evaporator, in which the liquid refrigerant is converted into a gas state. The evaporation of the refrigerant absorbs the heat from the alcohol in the water tank, and meantime the gaseous refrigerant is transmitted back to the compressor. This is a circulating process to reduce the temperature of alcohol in the water tank in the control device. In this circulating process, alcohol, as a secondary refrigerant, is circulated between the environmental chamber and the master control device, absorbing the heat in the environmental chamber, and further reducing the temperature in the environmental chamber. When the temperature in the environmental chamber reaches the desired value, the thermal compensation device in the master controller offsets the temperature variation, finally stabilizing the temperature in the environmental chamber. In this system, the precision of the temperature control of the testing system is 0.1 °C. And the temperature can be accurately controlled in the range of -30 °C ~ 60 °C. Furthermore, to guarantee that the rock specimen sandwiched between the two bars can be directly frozen in the environmental chamber, two heat-insulating rubber plugs are designed to isolate the temperature inside the environmental chamber (Fig. 3(a)). At the same time, since the wave impedance of the rubber is much smaller than that of the bars, the stress wave rarely propagates into the rubber plugs, thereby limiting the influence of the plugs on the stress wave propagation.

Fig. 2
figure 2
Schematics of a split Hopkinson pressure bar system with an in-situ controllable environmental chamber

Full size image
Fig. 3
figure 3
a The design inside the in-situ environmental chamber and b the original signals of the stress wave captured on the bars with the in-situ environmental chamber (The same impact velocity with the air pressure of 8psi; In. indicates incident wave and Tr. indicates transmitted wave)

Full size image
It is noteworthy that parts of the incident and transmitted bars are in the environmental chamber during the dynamic experiment, which inevitably induces a temperature gradient in these bars. Meanwhile, the significant temperature gradient in the same material generally has a significant influence on stress wave propagation [28, 29]. Therefore, the stress wave propagation in the bars with the temperature gradient was carefully checked in the system. Figure 3(b) shows the incident and transmitted waves in the bars at room temperature (20 °C), -10 °C, and -20 °C without the rock specimen under the same impact velocity. It demonstrates that the amplitudes of the incident wave and the transmitted wave are almost identical. This means that the alignment of the loading system is reasonable. Similarly, as shown in Fig. 3(b), the amplitudes of the incident and transmitted waves in the bars at -10 °C and -20 °C are approximately the same, indicating that the small local-temperature change in the bars has negligible effect on the stress wave propagation. Therefore, the dynamic low temperature testing system proposed in this study is reliable and feasible for measuring the dynamic properties of frozen rock under the real-time in-situ sub-zero temperature.

Specimen Preparation and Experimental Procedure
Since sandstone is widely distributed in cold regions of China, a white lithic-quartz sandstone from Zigong City, Sichuan Province, China was selected in this study. This white sandstone (WS) (the grain size from 0.25 mm to 0.5 mm) consists of quartz (90%), potassium feldspar and clay (3%), rock debris (7%). The tiny clay composition involves the physical reactions with water due to the nature adsorption. All WS specimens in this study were carefully prepared according to the ISRM suggested method for determining the dynamic compressive strength of WS [27]. All WS cores with a nominal diameter of 50 mm were first drilled from the same rock block along the same orientation and then sliced into the discs with the thickness of 25 mm. Two ends of the disc specimen were finally polished by using the high precision grinding machine. The end of the WS specimen shall be smooth and free of abrupt irregularity and the straightness over the full thickness of the specimen is within ± 0.02 mm as requested by the ISRM suggested methods [27]. The grinding speed of ~ 0.02 mm/min was chosen for WS specimens, which were further selected by using the ultrasonic measurements. The deviation of the P-wave velocity of the WS specimens used in this study is within 5%. The density, P-wave velocity and porosity of all WS specimen are almost consistent because the same block was used to machine the compressive samples. It indicates that the selected WS specimens for experimentation have good typicality and representativeness, which is beneficial for characterizing the freezing behaviors of the samples. Furthermore, for the dry specimen, the WS specimens were first heated in a servo-controlled electrical furnace with a 2 °C/min heating speed to 105 °C, which is slow enough to avoid cracking due to thermal shock [30]. Thereafter, the WS specimens were slowly cooled to ambient temperature under natural ventilation conditions, where the ambient humidity was 15%. For the saturated specimen, the WS samples were first completely saturated by distilled water in a vacuum environment for 72 h. The basic physical and mechanical properties of the white sandstone fully saturated at room temperature (20 °C) are given in Table 2.

Table 2 Basic physical and mechanical properties of white sandstone fully saturated (at 20 °C)
Full size table
Before the dynamic compressive test, the saturated WS specimen was frozen at the cooling rate of 1 °C/min and then kept at the desired temperature for 24 h in the environmental chamber. In this process, the cooling rate was accurately controlled as 1 °C/min, which is sufficiently slow to achieve uniform cooling in the entire WS specimen and prevent the thermal shock [9, 16, 31, 32]. When the saturated WS specimen was frozen in the environmental chamber, the specimen was sealed with plastic wrap to prevent water loss, and the incident and transmitted bars were placed outside of the chamber to reduce the impact of sub-zero temperature on the properties of bars during the freezing process. After that, the ends of the incident and transmitted bars to be in contact with the specimen were placed in the environment chamber for 30 min. The plastic wrap was then removed from the specimen, and the lubricant was applied to the two ends of the specimen to reduce the friction. Thereafter, the specimen was sandwiched between the two bars and kept for 30 min to ensure that the temperature in the specimen and the bars was uniform, and the unfrozen water content was unchanged. Finally, the dynamic compression test was conducted for the frozen rock under an accurate sub-zero temperature condition.

It is noteworthy that a light and a window (Fig. 2) are designed in the environment chamber to observe the dynamic failure process of frozen-saturated rocks during the loading period by using the high-speed camera. Since the mist generated by the water evaporation could block the window and further prevent the optical observation, the air-tight multiple glazing window is utilized to ensure the transparency of the window. Figure 4 shows the typical dynamic failure process of the dry and saturated WS specimens frozen at different sub-zero temperatures. The dynamic failure process can be clearly observed in the high-speed images and this system is valid to capture the dynamic process of frozen rock specimen.

Fig. 4
figure 4
High-speed images of the dynamic failure process of frozen dry and saturated rocks in typical tests (Loading rate: ~ 900 GPa/s)

Full size image
Dynamic Compressive Strength of Frozen Rock
The dynamic compressive strength (DCS) of rocks frozen under various sub-zero temperatures was measured by using the system proposed in this study. The DCS and the stress–strain curves were obtained by using the ISRM suggested method for determining the DCS of rocks. The details of the calculation can be found in the literature [27]. Since the ground temperature in Western China is generally above -30 °C [33], the DCS s of dry and saturated WS specimens frozen at -10 °C and -20 °C were measured and compared with the control group of WS specimens under 20 °C. Figure 5(a) illustrates the waveform (i.e., the stress history of three waves) obtained from a typical SHPB test, and the loading rate was determined by using the slope of the almost linear region of the transmitted stress history. Figure 5(b) shows the typical stress–strain curves of dry and saturated WS specimens under three different temperatures. At a given loading rate, the strain at the peak stress for both dry and saturated specimens under sub-zero temperatures is larger than that for the corresponding specimens at room temperature. This phenomenon was also observed in the quasi-static tests by Wang et al. [8]. This may be caused by the frost damage induced by both shrinkage of the minerals and the swelling of the water during the rock freezing. The frozen rock specimen with frost damage can absorb more energy and is more ductile compared with the rock specimen at room temperature. Thus, the strain at the peak stress of the frozen rock specimen is higher than that of the rock specimen at room temperature. Moreover, the stress–strain curves for the three dry specimens are similar, and three saturated specimens also have a similar form of stress–strain curves. However, in the post-peak region, the stress–strain curves of the saturated specimens are different from those of the dry specimens. Namely, there is a stress rebound at the end of the stress–strain curve for the dry specimen, while the strain softening can be observed in the stress–strain curve for the saturated specimen. This is mainly attributed to the interaction between the water/ice and the microcrack during the dynamic loading. Due to the existence of the water or ice in the mineral skeleton, more microcracks are involved in the dynamic failure process. Thus, more energy can be consumed and further the strain softening is presented in the stress–strain curve of the saturated specimens. This is consistent with the observation in the quasi-static and dynamic compression experiments of frozen rocks in previous studies [16, 34].

Fig. 5
figure 5
a The waveform in a typical SHPB test; b Stress and strain curves (~ 900 GPa/s); c dynamic compressive strength of dry and saturated WS

Full size image
The DCS of WS was derived from the peak stress in the dynamic stress–strain curve. Figure 5(c) shows the DCSs of dry and saturated WS under different temperatures. The DCS for all rocks are rate-dependent, i.e., the DCS of WS increases almost linearly with the loading rate [35]. In addition, at a certain loading rate, the DCSs of dry WS at -10 °C and -20 °C is higher than those at 20 °C, meaning that the DCS of frozen dry WS is enhanced by the sub-zero temperature. This phenomenon is consistent with the observation in the reference [16]. Moreover, under the same loading rate, the DCS of dry WS first increases and then decreases with the decrease of temperature, i.e., the WS rock at -10 °C has the highest DCS. The increase of the DCS of dry WS at -10 °C is mainly attributed to the undesirable absorption of water during the freezing process [36, 37]. The pore or crack walls are adhered to ice by unfrozen water film induced by the absorbed water [38], increasing the resistance to the tensile and shear failure of pores [8, 39] and further enhancing the DCS of dry WS. Besides, when the ambient temperature drops to -20 °C, the thermal damage due to the different shrinkage of minerals (i.e., the rock skeleton) dominates the decrease of DCS of WS from -10 °C to -20 °C [14, 16].

At a certain loading rate, the DCSs of saturated WS at sub-zero temperatures (-10 °C and -20 °C) is lower than those at room temperature, implying that the DCS of saturated WS is reduced by the sub-zero temperature. This phenomenon is distinct from the results reported by Weng et al. [16], in which the DCS of saturated rocks at sub-zero temperature (-10 °C and -20 °C) is slightly higher and then lower (below -20 °C) than that of saturated rocks at room temperature. It means that the sub-zero temperature also enhances the DCS of the saturated rock. This discrepancy may be related to the difference of the basic physical properties of the rock used in these studies. The grain size of siltstone in the reference is 7.7 μm-434.8 μm, and the porosity is 5.59%, while the grain size of WS is 250 μm-500 μm, and the porosity is 13%. The difference in porosity and pore size distribution directly affects the freezing process of pore water and the development of freezing strain. From 20 °C to -10 °C (Stage I), the DCS of the saturated WS under the same loading rate decreases, while from -10 °C to -20 °C (Stage II), the DCS of the saturated WS under the same loading rate increases. Under the same loading rate, the DCS of the saturated WS under sub-zero temperatures is lower than that at 20 °C. The freezing point of pore water is negatively correlated with pore size; in other words, a smaller pore implies a lower freezing point of pore water [40,41,42]. As shown in Fig. 1(a), the T2 spectrum is proportional to the radius of pores. When the temperature decreases from 20 °C to -10 °C, the T2 spectrum gradually moves to the left, indicating that the pore radius of unfrozen water gradually decreases due to the phase change of pore water. There may be two possible reasons for this phenomenon: a) The water located in the existing smaller pores is harder to crystallize if the temperature drops blew the melting point [43]; b) The new tiny microcracks are created due to the frost heave. When the temperature decreases from -10 °C to -20 °C, the T2 spectrum moves a little, indicating that the newly formed tiny pores are not apparent, and the area of the frost heave damage zone is almost stable.

At Stage I, when the temperature drops to 0 °C, the water in large pores mainly changes into ice and fills the pores and microcracks. The pore ice not only can provide resistance to the compression failure but also enhance the cohesion among mineral particles. Hence, the strengthening effect mentioned above could improve the DCS of frozen-saturated WS. However, when the water began to crystallize, the pore water swells, and thus the freezing swollen force is emerged, resulting in the expansion of microcracks and pores. This induces the frost damage in the rock skeleton. In addition, the weakening effect of the unfrozen water in tiny pores reduce somehow the DCS of the WS specimen. As discussed above, the strengthening effect of porous ice is not neutralized by the weakening effect of unfrozen water and frost-induced damage at Stage I. Therefore, the DCS of saturated WS at -10 °C is lower than that at 20 °C. At Stage II, the water in tiny pores commences changing into ice, and the content of unfrozen water decreases. It has been proven that the irreversible residual strain generated in the freezing process of pore water can reflect the frost-induced damage in saturated rocks [44, 45]. Meanwhile, the residual strain tends to be stable from -10 °C to -20 °C based on the frost model for the saturated rocks [46]. Therefore, the strengthening effect of the porous ice further increases with the decrease of the temperature, while the frost-induced damage tends to stable. As a result, the DCS of saturated WS at -20 °C is greater than that at -10 °C. A formula is proposed to describe the frozen and the loading rate effect on the DCS of WS:

(2)
where σdc is the dynamic compressive strength, 
 is the loading rate, 
 (= 1GPa/s) is the reference loading rate. σ0 is the compressive strength when the loading rate are approximately 0 GPa/s, α are the fitting parameters indicating the rate dependence. The fitting curves and fitting parameters are presented in Fig. 5(c) and Table 3. Equation (2) is a phenomenal formula by fitting the data points in Fig. 5(c). It can provide the good prediction of the dynamic compressive strength of WS under the specific range of temperatures and loading rates. The values of α for the saturated specimens at sub-zero temperatures are smaller than that at room temperature. This may by caused by the phase transition of water with the decrease of temperature. The gradual increase of ice under sub-zero temperature enhances the initiation and propagation of pores and microcracks in the rock specimen subjected to the dynamic load, resulting in the decrease of the rate dependence of frozen saturated specimens.

Table 3 The values of fitting parameters
Full size table
Conclusions
In this note, we developed a dynamic low temperature testing system with a controllable cooling rate and an in-situ stable sub-zero temperature device to measure the dynamic compressive strength of frozen rocks. The necessity for conducting the dynamic frozen-rock experiments without changing the temperature environment during the entire experimental process was analyzed, indicating that the variation of the unfrozen water content has an impact on the accuracy of experimental measurement. This dynamic low temperature testing system is valid for performing the dynamic rock test under ambient sub-zero temperature and capturing the dynamic process of frozen rock specimens. The dry and saturated white porous sandstone specimens were tested under 20 °C, -10 °C, and -20 °C with the loading rate range from 600 GPa/s- 1900 GPa/s. The results show that the dynamic compressive strength (DCS) of dry white sandstone (WS) is higher than those of saturated sandstones at 20 °C, -10 °C, and -20 °C. Besides, under the same loading rate, the DCS of dry WS first increases and then decreases with the temperature decrease, which is mainly attributed to the undesirable absorption of water during the frozen process. Moreover, the DCS of saturated WS used in this study first decreases and then increases with the decrease of temperature due to both the strengthening effect of the porous ice and the frost-induced damage. An empirical formula was proposed to describe the temperature effect and the rate effect on the DCS of white sandstone.