1. Introduction
It is well known that in addition to hydrogen atoms, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and boron (B) atoms are also the most frequent foreign impurity atoms in material matrix. Beyond their solution limit, they play a crucial role in the formations of carbides, nitrides, oxides, and borides, which are much useful to improve the hardness and strength of materials. Below their solution limit, even a small amount of these foreign impurities (e.g. the order of a few tens of part per million) in the interstitial lattices or defects can have a significant impact on material properties because they can strongly interact with the interstitial lattice or defects. A representative instance is the controversial source over the migration energy of foreign impurity hydrogen in tungsten (W). Frauenfelder measured and gained an energy barrier of 0.39 eV [1], while Zakharov et al. got an energy barrier of 1.07 eV [2]. This scattering data is likely due to the difficulty in gaining much pure W crystals. Even a small amount of foreign hydrogen impurities can be captured by the defects such as vacancies and therefore lower the hydrogen diffusivity.
Due to its advantages in fuel abundance, cleanness, and safety, magnetic confinement nuclear fusion energy has been regarded as the possible solution approach to the energy crisis. The steady operation and ultimate application of fusion Tokamak devices are crucially dependent on the developments of materials. As the primary candidate for the plasma facing component (PFC) material, W has good functionalities including high thermal conductivity, high melting point, and low sputtering yield [[3], [4], [5]]. While owing to its low thermal expansion coefficient, high thermal conductivity, and high melting temperature [[6], [7], [8], [9]], molybdenum (Mo) mirrors will be applicable for the optical diagnostics in order to control the plasma in fusion Tokamak device. Meanwhile, Mo mirrors have to suffer the transient temperature increment in the Tokamak [[10], [11], [12], [13]]. Thus, the selections of PFC and first mirror material (FMM) play a crucial role in the practical application of nuclear fusion Tokamak devices.
Both W-B (tungsten-boride) and Mo-B (molybdenum-boride) belong to the refractory and compound binary systems. Up to now, W-boride have been widely explored with these different stoichiometric compositions including W2B, WB, WB2, W2B5, and WB4. The W2B system has been experimentally synthesized with a tetragonal configuration [[14], [15], [16], [17]], and W2B-W2B belongs to be metallic by further theoretical researches [17]. Note that W2B-W2B is here used to denote W2B crystallizing in the W2B-type structure and the same symbol for the following other W-borides. The WB system crystallizes with a tetragonal WB configuration [[14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20]]. Through single-crystal diffractometry method, the WB2 system has been measured to be existence with the WB2-WB2 type configuration [21], which has been confirmed by employing high purity element powders in stoichiometric compositions [22,23]. Moreover, theoretical researches have also validated that WB2-WB2 type configuration is energetically more stable than other structures [24]. The W2B5 system was originally synthesized in an assumed WB2.5 composition with a hexagonal configuration, but the B positions could not be established from the relevant experiment [25]. The WB4 system has been prepared with a hexagonal configuration [16,20,21,26,27]. Zhao et al. examined the phase stability and mechanical properties of all these W-borides (W2B, WB, WB2, W2B5 and WB4) using first-principles calculations [28] and attested the experimentally observed W2B-W2B and WB-WB structures. More recently, Yang and Wirth performed first-principles calculations to comprehensively study the diffusion mechanisms for intrinsic point defects in W-borides including W2B, WB, WB2, W2B5, WB3, and WB4 [29]. Based on DFT method, Qin et al. investigated crystal structures, electronic properties, and mechanical properties of both WB2 and MoB2 borides [30], which were in fair agreement with previous theoretical and experimental results. While Li et al. also performed the DFT calculations to systematically explore crystal structures, thermodynamic stability of phases, and mechanical properties of both WB and MoB monoborides with orthorhombic and tetragonal configurations, and the corresponding results agree well with other theoretical and experimental values [31].
It can be clearly seen that the above researches were only provided with the cases for W-B or Mo-B borides. With regard to energetics of B impurity in W or Mo, recently Yang and Wirth [32] performed systematically first-principles calculations to explore the adsorption, diffusion, and solution of B near the W(100), W(110), and W(111) surfaces, and Tayran also used DFT method to study the electronic structures and energetics of B at Mo(110) surface as well as the B-stability in the Mo subsurface [33]. Zeng et al. [34] predicted diffusion activation energies of interstitial B as well as other impurities in W/Mo as well as other metals using machine learning. However, they did not further explore these behaviors of B impurity in bulk W and Mo. Regarding impurity B in other metals, the interstitial diffusion behaviors and thermodynamics of B in Ge [35], α/β-Ti [36], α-Ti(0001) surface [37], Ni-based single crystal super-alloys [38], and H13-steel [39] have also been widely studied till now.
While in the current work, we only focuses on the behaviors of impurity B in bulk W and Mo. It can be expected to produce a significant effect on the thermodynamics and kinetics of defects and thus can have a large effect on the properties of W and Mo. There are three different aspects that need to be clarified for impurity B in both W and Mo: (1) solution and relocation diffusion of impurity B at the interstitial lattice position in defect-free W/Mo, (2) interaction between impurity B and defect vacancy in W/Mo, and (3) clustering and formation mechanism of B-vacancy interaction in W/Mo. Regarding the above three issues, herein we have systematically explored the behavioral characteristics of B in both W and Mo. These research results can provide a wealth of references for the preparation and application of PFCs and FMMs for W and Mo in fusion Tokamak devices.
2. Computational details
We performed first-principles calculations using the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) code [40,41] based on density functional theory (DFT). The electron exchange and correlation were treated within the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) using the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof functional [[42], [43], [44]]. The 6s5d, 5s4p4d, and 2s1p electrons were treated as valence electrons for W, Mo, and B, and the ionic cores were represented by the projector augmented wave potentials [45,46]. The energy cutoff of plane wave for both W and Mo is tested to be 400 eV, which is sufficient for the total energy and geometry of W/Mo supercells with and without impurity B. During the geometry optimization, we used the 128-atom supercell containing (4 × 4 × 4) unit cells with the lengths of 12.68 Å (W) and 12.64 Å (Mo) in the [100], [010], and [001] directions, respectively. The calculated equilibrium lattice constant is 3.17/3.16 Å for bcc W/Mo, which agrees well with the corresponding experimental value of 3.16/3.15 Å [47]. The Brillouin zone of supercell was sampled with the Monkhorst-Pack scheme [48] using a (3 × 3 × 3) k-points mesh. The Methfessel-Paxton [49] smearing method was used to integrate the Brillouin zone and account for partial occupancy of the metals near the Fermi level with a smearing width of 0.1 eV. During the calculations, the supercell size and atomic positions are relaxed to equilibrium, and energy minimization is converged until the forces on all the atoms are less than 0.001 eVÅ-1.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Position preference of single B atom in intrinsic W and Mo
We first investigated the solution characteristics of single B atom at the interstitial lattice in perfect W and Mo. The lowest energy structure for interstitial B can be determined by putting one B atom into all possible gap sites. Due to the fact that both W and Mo belong to bcc structure, there are two kinds of high-symmetry interstitial structures, which are octerhedral interstitial position (oip) and tetrahedral interstitial position (tip), respectively. The formation (solution) energy of B at these two interstitial lattices is defined as
where 
 is the total energy of W or Mo supercell containing an interstitial B atom, 
 is the total energy of intrinsic W or Mo supercell, the B chemical potential μB corresponds to the energy of one B atom in the lowest energy alpha-rhombohedral phase and it is calculated to be −6.608 eV, which is 0.095 eV higher than −6.703 eV obtained by Yang and Wirth [32], however these two values remain basically consistent within the range of error.
After structural optimizations, the calculated formation energies with respect to the B chemical potential are listed in Table 1. We see that the formation energies of B at oip and tip in W/Mo are 2.01/1.60 eV and 3.55/2.74 eV, respectively. Interstitial B in both metals, the oip is lower in energy than the tip. However, as shown in Table 1, the present B formation energies in W differ slightly from those results reported by Yang and Wirth [32] who obtained the lower B formation energies at oip and tip with 2.23 and 3.86 eV, respectively. The reason lies in that they calculated the B formation energy in W referring to one B chemical potential of −6.703 eV, which is about 0.095 eV lower than −6.608 eV currently used in this work. Although different B chemical potentials have significant effect on the absolute values of formation energy of B in bulk W and Mo, they cannot affect the relative stability of B in the oip and the tip as well as the B diffusion energy barrier. For instance, the present B formation energy difference between tis and ois is 1.54 eV, basically consistent with 1.63 eV gained by Yang and Wirth [32]. Such a small difference of 0.09 eV should be due to the use of different cutoff energies (360 eV in Ref. 32 and 400 eV in this work) and other factors, such as convergence conditions.
Table 1. In W and Mo, the calculated B formation energies (eV) with respect to the B chemical potential as well as the energy difference between tip and oip. For comparison, we also show other DFT results from Ref. 32 using PAW-GGA.

Metals	W	Mo
2.01, 2.23 [32]	1.60
3.55, 3.86 [32]	2.74
1.54, 1.63 [32]	1.14
Comparison of B between W and Mo, it can be clearly seen that the formation energy for B at oip is distinctly higher in W than in Mo, and the energy discrepancy is close to 0.41 eV. This demonstrates that for giving a specific B chemical potential, a much lower concentration of B at the interstitial lattice can be dissolved in W than in Mo. For instance, using the data given in Table 1, the B concentration dissolving in the interstitial lattice in W is less than seven and three orders of magnitude lower than in Mo at temperatures of 300 and 900 K, respectively.
It is well known that the valence electron density distribution plays a key role in analyzing inter-atomic bonding properties because the accumulation and depletion of electrons are directly important indicators of chemical bond formation. In W, we provide the distribution of valence electron densities in the (001) plane for impurity B at these two interstitial positions, as shown in Fig. 1. In perfect W system, as seen in Fig. 1(e), all W atoms are located at the corresponding normal lattice positions and W-W can form an obvious metallic bond after structure relaxation and optimization, which binds all W atoms together and contributes most to the strength of W single crystal. As shown in Figs. 1(a), (b), (c), and (d), the appearance of impurity B atom at tip or oip can cause a significant change in valence electron density distribution. The valence electron density in the region around the B atom is dramatically enhanced and a highly directional bond containing covalent components is formed between W and B. The similar analysis can be applied to the situation of impurity B in Mo system, therefore we will not provide the corresponding valence electron density distribution here.

Download: Download high-res image (562KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. The valence electron density distribution in the (001) plane for impurity B in W. The range of valence electron density is from 0.22 electron/Å3 (e/Å3) to 0.96 e/Å3. (a) 1 and 2 are two 1nn W atoms of B at tip, respectively. (b) 3 and 4 are also two 1nn W atoms of B at tip, respectively. (c) 1, 2, 3, and 4 are four 2nn W atoms of B at oip, respectively. (d) 5 and 6 are two 1nn W atoms of B at oip, respectively. (e) The distribution of valence electron density in the (001) plane for perfect W.

3.2. Formation and migration of mono-vacancy in W and Mo
For research completeness, we also explored the formation stability and migration of mono-vacancy in both W and Mo. The formation energy can be given as
where 
 denotes the total energy of W or Mo supercell containing one mono-vacancy, and the calculated results were displayed in Table 2. It can be found that both formation energy and migration energy of one mono-vacancy is relatively higher in W than in Mo, and the energy differences are 0.55 and 0.49 eV, respectively. Notice that both two energy differences are relatively large, suggesting that whether it is formation or migration, vacancy is much easier in Mo than in W. It is well known that the sum of formation and migration energy denotes the diffusion activation energy of vacancy-mediated self-diffusion. We see from Table 2 that the sums of two values are 4.80 and 3.76 eV in W and Mo, respectively, and they have significant differences. Therefore, it can be expected that the self-diffusion rates through vacancy-mediated mechanism also exhibit significant differences in both W and Mo.
Table 2. In both W and Mo, the calculated formation energy and migration energy of mono-vacancy. For comparison, we also give other DFT [50] and experimental [51,52] results. All energy units are in eV.

Empty Cell	W	Mo
Formation energy	3.14	2.59
3.17 [50]	2.70 [51]
Migration energy	1.66	1.17
1.66 [50]	1.35 [52]
For the formation/migration energy of mono-vacancy in W, our current calculated results agree well with previous theoretical data [50]. The small discrepancies fall into the expected error bar of the DFT approach and might be attributed to the energy cutoff of 240 eV for plane wave in Ref. 50 instead of the energy cutoff of 400 eV employed in this work. While for the formation/migration energy of mono-vacancy in Mo, our current computed results are slightly lower than the existing experimental values [51,52], however, maintaining basic consistency within the error range. Note that in section 3.4, we will provide a detailed discussion on vacancy diffusion and not go into too much detail here.
3.3. B-vacancy interaction in W and Mo
3.3.1. One B atom trapped by mono-vacancy
Now, we begin to discuss the most fundamental process for the B-vacancy interactions in W and Mo, i.e., the capturing of one B atom at one mono-vacancy. Such a basic process might be characterized by a capturing energy related to the energy acquisition by W/Mo system when an interstitial B atom is placed into an originally empty vacancy. The capturing energy of B atom can be defined as
(3)
where 
 represents the formation energy of W (Mo) supercell with one B1V cluster, both 
 and 
 have been given in Eq. (1) and Eq. (2), respectively. The positive/negative capturing energy represents the repulsion/attraction between B and mono-vacancy.
We found from Fig. 2 that the capturing energies of the first B atom at mono-vacancy are −2.67 and −2.51 eV in W and Mo, respectively. These two values are negative (<0) and much lower than that one B atom at the oip in perfect metals, meaning that the formation of B1V cluster from “mono-vacancy and one oip-B (i.e., V + Boip → B1V) can cause these energy releases of 2.67 and 2.51 eV for B atom in W and Mo, respectively. Therefore there is an exothermic process for capturing one B atom in an originally empty vacancy, leading to that B atom and mono-vacancy exhibit the strong attraction. It can be also noted that the absolute value of capturing energy in W is larger than in Mo, suggesting that there is a relatively stronger binding between B and mono-vacancy in W than in Mo. In addition, we found that in both situations, the first B atom is not located at the center of mono-vacancy but preferable to stay very close to an oip next to the site of vacancy center, as schematically displayed in Fig. 3(a) for the bcc lattice structure in W/Mo.

Download: Download high-res image (83KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. The capturing energy as function of the number of B trapped by one mono-vacancy in W and Mo. The reference energy is the energy of B at the oip far away from the mono-vacancy in both W and Mo.


Download: Download high-res image (286KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Schematic diagram of atomic configurations with different numbers of B atoms captured by one mono-vacancy in W/Mo. (a) 1B atom, (b) 2B atoms, (c) 3B atoms, (d) 4B atoms, (e) 5B atoms, and (f) 6B atoms. The dashed box represents the mono-vacancy. The larger gray balls and the smaller green balls represent W/Mo and B atoms, respectively. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

3.3.2. Multi-B atoms trapped by mono-vacancy
We further explored the possibility of one mono-vacancy capturing more than one B atom. Under this situation, the capturing energy is defined as “the discrepancy of formation energy between one BnV cluster and one Bn-1V cluster plus one single B atom at the oip”, the formula is given as
(4)
where 
 and 
 represent the formation energies of W (Mo) supercell with one BnV and one Bn-1V clusters, respectively. A negative value of the capturing energy hence demonstrates that taking one B atom at the oip and putting it into one mono-vacancy that has already contained n-1B atoms is energetically favorable. In other words, the negative capturing energy denotes the attraction between an interstitial B and Bn-1V cluster, i.e., an interstitial B and Bn-1V cluster can form one BnV cluster (Fig. 4).

Download: Download high-res image (245KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Schematic diagram of atomic configurations with two B atoms captured by one mono-vacancy in W and Mo. (a) and (c) denote two B atoms along the <001> direction, i.e., B2V<001> cluster. (b) and (d) represent two B atoms along the <110> direction, i.e., B2V<110> cluster. The larger gray and purple balls represent W and Mo atoms, respectively, while the smaller green balls represent B atoms. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Based on the requirements of Eq. (4), we first calculated the formation energies for a number of fully relaxed configurations as candidates for the BnV cluster. To sufficiently sample the configuration space, we started from several different initial configurations for the BnV cluster, according to the configuration of the lowest energy Bn-1V cluster plus one B atom. The specific results are listed in Table 3.
Table 3. The capturing energies for all relevant BnV clusters in W and Mo. All energies are in eV.

Host metal	Cluster	
W	B1V	−2.67
B2V	−2.92
B3V	−2.51
B4V	−2.25
B5V	−1.65
B6V	−1.15

Mo	B1V	−2.51
B2V	−2.67
B3V	−2.22
B4V	−2.05
B5V	−1.54
B6V	−1.05
For the 2th interstitial B atom entering the B1V cluster to form the B2V cluster through the reaction B1V + Boip → B2V. The energy minimization finds that the most stable configuration is that two B atoms are located at two separate positions close to the oip and arranged along the <110> direction in both W and Mo, as shown in Fig. 3(b), and the corresponding capturing energies are −2.92 and −2.67 eV (see Fig. 2), respectively. Here this configuration is called as B2V<110 > cluster. Hence, the formation of the B2V cluster can cause the energy releases of 2.92 and 2.67 eV in W and Mo, respectively. In addition, as shown in Fig. 3, Fig. 3, there is a meta-stable configuration in which two B atoms are located at two respective positions close to the oip and arranged along the <001> direction with the capturing energy of −2.69/−2.36 eV in W/Mo. We call this configuration as B2V<001> cluster, which has a slightly higher energy of 0.23/0.31 eV than the B2V<110> cluster in W/Mo. On the other hand, it can be seen from Fig. 2 that the capturing energies (−2.92/−2.67 eV in W/Mo) of the B2V cluster become lower compared with those (−2.67/−2.51 eV in W/Mo) of the B1V cluster, meaning that the B2V cluster is more stable than the B1V cluster in both metals.
For the 3th interstitial B atom entering the B2V cluster to form the B3V cluster through the reaction B2V + Boip → B3V, we have also searched all possible configurations that have been relaxed to the state of equilibrium after calculations. The energy optimization demonstrates that three B atoms occupy three neighboring oips and form an isosceles triangle in both W and Mo, as shown in Fig. 3(c). The corresponding capturing energies (see Fig. 2) of the B3V cluster are −2.51 and −2.22 eV in W and Mo, respectively. Hence, the formation of B3V cluster is also exothermic with the energy releases of 2.51 and 2.22 eV in W and Mo, respectively. It is important to note that the capturing energies of the B3V cluster become larger in comparison with those (−2.92 eV in W and −2.67 eV in Mo) of the B2V cluster, suggesting that the B3V cluster is not as stable as the B2V cluster in both W and Mo.
As the number of B atoms entering mono-vacancy increases, the energy release will carry through continuously. In W/Mo, the formation of B4V (B3V + Boip → B4V), B5V (B4V + Boip → B5V), and B6V (B5V + Boip → B6V) clusters can cause the energy releases of 2.25/2.05, 1.65/1.54, and 1.15/1.05 eV, respectively, and all formation processes are still exothermic in both metals. Fig. 5(d)–(f) display schematic diagram of atomic configurations for these three types of clusters, in which four, five, and six B atoms form a square, a pentahedron, and a hexahedron in B4V, B5V, and B6V clusters, respectively.
Above, we have analyzed the stable atomic configurations of multiple B atoms captured by one mono-vacancy in both W and Mo. As shown in Fig. 2, we could comprehend the capturing of B atoms by the mono-vacancy as the following. The first B atom gains a capturing (binding) energy of −2.67/−2.51 eV as the B atom is preferentially located near the oip in atomic form in W/Mo. When more B atoms are added, they will experience a repulsive interaction with each other, which can be reflected in a roughly linear increment in the capturing energy by ∼0.40 eV per B atom (see Fig. 2) in both W and Mo, the capturing of additional B atoms becomes increasingly less energetically favorable with the increasing number of B atoms in the mono-vacancy. Once all six oips nearby are occupied with n = 6, any additional B atoms are forced to stay at those less favorable positions. As a result, from the perspective of current capturing energy, one mono-vacancy is able to capture at least 6B atoms in both W and Mo. Clearly, it is energetically favorable for mono-vacancy to capture multiple B atoms, and therefore vacancies may be regarded as the trapping center of impurity B atoms to form BnV clusters or larger BnVm clusters in both W and Mo.
3.4. Diffusion of interstitial B and mono-vacancy in W and Mo
In this section, we explore the diffusion properties of interstitial B atom and mono-vacancy in both W and Mo. The climbing image nudged elastic band (CI-NEB) method [53] was used to determine minimum energy migration pathway for impurity B in the interstitial lattice positions. The linear interpolation on atomic positions were performed to set the images along the migration pathway to connect the initial and final positions. The artificial springs connect the initial and final positions to built one band, which can be relaxed according to the CI-NEB algorithm to gain the minimum energy migration pathway and transition state. The energy discrepancy between transition state and minimum is the diffusion activation energy.
In the interstitial lattice of bcc W, the lowest energy migration pathway for impurity B is that a single B atom migrates from an initial oip to a 1nn oip, passing through a middle “saddle-point” position tip, i.e., oip → tip → oip, as schematically displayed in Fig. 5(a). Due to the same bcc lattice structure as W in Mo, B atom has the same lowest energy diffusion pathway in Mo, i.e., oip → tip → oip, as schematically displayed in Fig. 6(a). The diffusion activation energies are calculated to be 1.54 and 1.14 eV in W (Fig. 5(b)) and Mo (Fig. 6(b)), respectively, which happen to be the energy differences when B atom occupies tip and oip. Using machine learning, Zeng et al. [34] obtained the interstitial B diffusion activation energies, which were 1.47 and 1.19 eV in W and Mo, respectively. Yang and Wirth [32] performed first-principles calculations to gain an activation energy of 1.63 eV for interstitial B diffusion in W. It can be seen that within the error range, our current calculated results are consistent with these reported values previously. We also notice that the diffusion activation energy of B in W is higher than that in Mo, with an energy difference of 0.40 eV. This indicates that impurity B atom migrates more easily in Mo than in W. However, from a practical perspective, B atom has a relatively larger energy barrier in both metals, implying that it is very difficult for interstitial B atom to migrate at lower temperature. But with the increasing temperature, B atom can be mobile in the interstitial lattice in both metals. Experimentally, employing a low-energy electron diffraction (LEED), Tucker [54] investigated the behavior of B in W single crystal with a successive increasing temperature, and found that the diffusion of interstitial B in bulk W can occur at high temperatures of 873–973 K. Thus, the similar high-temperature diffusion conditions should be also suitable for impurity B in Mo.

Download: Download high-res image (362KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. (a) Schematic diffusion route (oip → tip → oip) of B atom in the interstitial lattice in W. (b) The corresponding diffusion activation energy of B atom. (c) Schematic diffusion routes (Path 1 and Path 2) of mono-vacancy in W. (d) The corresponding diffusion activation energies for mono-vacancy along the Path 1 and Path 2, respectively.


Download: Download high-res image (378KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. (a) Schematic diffusion route (oip → tip → oip) of B atom in the interstitial lattice in Mo. (b) The corresponding diffusion activation energy of B atom. (c) Schematic diffusion routes (Path 1 and Path 2) of mono-vacancy in Mo. (d) The corresponding diffusion activation energies for mono-vacancy along the Path 1 and Path 2, respectively.

During the migration process, interstitial B should be trapped by vacancies, forming the BnV clusters owing to the larger B-vacancy binding (capturing) energy. The strong attraction between B and vacancies makes it almost impossible for B atom to detach from the vacancies at lower temperatures. This means that the B capturing by vacancies to form BnV clusters become much stable, and this stability of BnV clusters at temperature T is directly relevant with the dissociation energy (Ed) of B from BnV clusters. According to previous work by Janotti and Van de Walle [55], the relationship between T and Ed can be given as T = Ed/0.00258, where Ed is equal to the sum of the diffusion activation energy of B and the negative value of the current capturing energy of B to BnV cluster. For instance, employing the calculated diffusion activation energy (1.54/1.14 eV in W/Mo) of B and the negative capturing energy (2.67 and 2.51 eV in W/Mo) of B to one mono-vacancy, the B desorption temperature is estimated to be 1631/1414 K in W/Mo. Thus, if B atom wants to detach from the mono-vacancy to form an interstitial B atom and an empty vacancy, it will have to overcome a very large dissociation energy with higher temperature in both W and Mo. Other impurities such as hydrogen and helium have similar dissociation mechanism with vacancy or defects in W. For example, the hydrogen desorption peak temperature in W was estimated to be 558 K by Yang and Wirth [32], while Zhou et al. [56] found that the helium dissociation to HenVIW (heliumn-vacancy-interstitialW) in W occurs for n = 2–6 at temperatures of 2268, 1629, 1106, 988, and 717 K, respectively.
After the B atom dissociates from the vacancy, the interstitial B atom and mono-vacancy migrate along their respective diffusion routes. From Fig. 5(c) and Fig. 6(c), we can clearly see that one mono-vacancy in W/Mo may migrate along <001> and <111> directions, in which these two energy barriers are calculated to be 2.16/1.55 and 1.66/1.17 eV, respectively. Thus, the favorable migration pathway for a mono-vacancy is not the <001> direction but the <111> direction. Along the directions of <001> and <111> in W, the calculated energy barriers of 2.16 and 1.66 eV are, respectively, higher and lower than the experimental value of 1.79 eV [57], but it can be seen that the difference between theoretical and experimental results is not too big within the error range. Similar situation can also occur in Mo, the calculated energy barriers of mono-vacancy along the <001> and <111> directions are 1.55 and 1.17 eV, which are also, respectively, a little higher and lower than 1.35 eV from experimental measurement [58]. The reason for this phenomenon is that the experimental value was obtained in poly-crystalline W/Mo samples whereas the theoretical results were calculated along a certain direction only. On the other hand, as shown in Fig. 5, Fig. 6, the migration energy of one mono-vacancy between two 2nn sites (i.e., along the <001> direction) is obviously larger than between two 1nn sites (i.e., along the <111> direction), and therefore the diffusion of mono-vacancy along the <001> direction will be achieved through a zigzag path at relatively low temperatures.
The diffusion coefficients of B atom and mono-vacancy in W/Mo are defined as 
, where D0 and 
 denote exponential factor and energy barrier of carbon/mono-vacancy, respectively. The diffusion theory [59] clearly states that D0 is expressed as 
 and 
 for B atom and mono-vacancy, respectively, where n, a, and v are the jumping number of 1nn sites (i.e., n = 4 and 8 for B and mono-vacancy migrating following their respective favorable diffusion pathways), the lattice parameter of 3.17/3.16 Å for W/Mo, and the vibration frequency, respectively. While the vibration frequency is given as 
[60,61], then m represents the mass of B/W/Mo atom. Notice that mono-vacancy migration is actually the diffusion of W/Mo atom. Thus, the calculated vibration frequencies are 2.125 × 1013 Hz and 1.576 × 1013 Hz for B in W and Mo, respectively. While the vibration frequencies are 0.065 × 1012 Hz and 0.076 × 1012 Hz for W and Mo atoms, respectively. The final diffusion coefficients of B and mono-vacancy in W and Mo can be obtained as: DB(W) = 3.55 × 10-7exp(−1.54/kT) m2s−1, DB(Mo) = 2.62 × 10-7exp(−1.14/kT) m2s−1, DV(W) = 6.53 × 10-9exp(−1.66/kT) m2s−1, and DV(Mo) = 7.59 × 10-9exp(−1.17/kT) m2s−1. For comparison, we have also calculated the diffusion coefficients of B in W and Mo using the B activation energies obtained by Zeng et al. [34] and Yang and co-author [32]. The specific results are as follows: DB(W) = 3.23 × 10-7exp(−1.47/kT) m2s−1 [34], DB(W) = 3.98 × 10-7exp(−1.63/kT) m2s−1 [32], and DB(Mo) = 2.85 × 10-7exp(−1.19/kT) m2s−1 [34].
In W and Mo, the B/mono-vacancy diffusion coefficients as a function of reciprocal of temperature are displayed in Fig. 7. It can be seen that at the same temperature, the B diffusion coefficient in W is about 2–7 orders of magnitude lower than that in Mo, while the diffusion coefficient of mono-vacancy in W is about 3–9 orders of magnitude lower than that in Mo. This indicates that both interstitial B and mono-vacancy migrate much slower in W than in Mo. At the same time, the interstitial B diffusion coefficient in both metals is significantly higher than that of mono-vacancy, hinting that the diffusion of B along the interstitial position is much easier than that of mono-vacancy following the <111> direction. We can therefore draw a conclusion for the formation mechanism of BnV clusters, i.e., the relatively stable vacancies trap these freely moving interstitial B atoms in both W and Mo. We have also noticed the similar study on the diffusion of impurity carbon and vacancies in bcc Fe [58], where the interstitial carbon diffusion coefficient is obviously lower than that of mono-vacancy, indicating that the diffusion of impurity carbon along the interstitial site is much difficult than that of mono-vacancy through the <111> direction, i.e., the relatively stable interstitial carbon atoms trap these freely moving vacancies through the interstitial trapping mechanism in bcc Fe [58]. Therefore, different impurity clusters have different formation mechanisms in different metals.

Download: Download high-res image (148KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. For interstitial B and mono-vacancy, the diffusion coefficients as a function of reciprocal of temperature in W and Mo. For comparison, the situations of interstitial carbon and mono-vacancy are also provided in bcc Fe.

4. Conclusion
Based on first-principles methods, we have systematically explored the geometric structures, electronic properties, diffusion behavior, and clustering with vacancy of impurity B in both W and Mo metals, which are regarded as fusion materials. The specific results are now briefly summarized as follows.
i.
A single B atom is preferable to stay at the oip rather than the tip in both W and Mo. The formation energy for B is distinctly higher in W than in Mo, and the energy discrepancy is close to 0.41 eV. This fully demonstrates that for giving a specific B chemical potential, a much lower concentration of B at the interstitial lattice can be dissolved in W than in Mo. In both metals, the valence electron density distributions of impurity B at these two interstitial positions have been analyzed in detail.
ii.
Due to its high binding energy, impurity B can be easily captured by vacancies in both W and Mo. Single B atom is preferable to stay very close to an oip next to the site of vacancy center, and the capturing energies at vacancy are −2.67 and −2.51 eV in W and Mo, respectively. By sequentially putting B atoms into vacancy, three, four, five, and six B atoms form a triangle, square, pentahedron, and hexahedron in B3V, B4V, B5V, and B6V clusters, respectively. For these BnV (n = 1–6) clusters, their formation processes are all exothermic, i.e., the capturing energies of B atoms in vacancy are always negative in both metals. In other words, one mono-vacancy can capture at least 6B atoms, where 6B atoms occupy the oips close to six faces, respectively. Therefore, vacancies may be regarded as the capturing center of impurity B atoms to form BnV clusters or larger BnVm clusters in both W and Mo.
iii.
For impurity B atom at interstitial lattice in both metals, the lowest energy migration pathway is the oip → tip → oip, and the corresponding activation energies are 1.54 and 1.14 eV in W and Mo, respectively, meaning that impurity B migrates more easily in Mo than in W. While the activation energy in W and Mo are, respectively, 1.66 and 1.17 eV for mono-vacancy along the 〈1 1 1〉 direction, which is the favorable migration pathway. The diffusion coefficients of impurity B atom and mono-vacancy are systematically analyzed according to Arrhenius diffusion equation. At the same temperature, the B diffusion coefficient in W is about 2–7 orders of magnitude lower than that in Mo, while the diffusion coefficient of mono-vacancy in W is about 3–9 orders of magnitude lower than that in Mo, meaning that both interstitial B and mono-vacancy migrate much slower in W than in Mo. At the same time, the interstitial B diffusion coefficient in both metals is significantly greater than that of mono-vacancy, demonstrating that the migration of interstitial B atom is much easier than that of mono-vacancy. We can therefore draw a conclusion for the formation mechanism of BnV clusters, i.e., the relatively stable vacancies capture these freely moving interstitial B atoms in both W and Mo.