1. Introduction
Under the background of climate warming, the risk of engineering and natural disasters is increasing in cold regions. It is expected that by the middle of this century, one-third of the population and 48–87% of infrastructures in the northern hemisphere will be in areas where permafrost melts, and a large number of existing infrastructures (railway, residential infrastructure, crude oil and natural gas transportation routes, etc.) in cold regions will be located in high-risk areas, posing a serious threat to the natural resources and the sustainable development (Hjort et al., 2018). In particular, the irregular thermal thawing landform formed by uneven subsidence caused by thawing of ice-rich permafrost, the potentially destructive collapse of slopes induced by thawing of near-surface permafrost, and the increase of seasonal thawing layer thickness all affect the stability and bearing capacity of infrastructures (Nelson, 2003; Nelson et al., 2001). Considering the influence of the uncertainty of climate change on the bearing capacity of infrastructures, it is conservatively estimated that in Russian permafrost regions it will decline within 25% in the middle of this century, which does not have a great impact on the infrastructures. Considering the most unfavorable conditions, the bearing capacity of the whole permafrost areas will be reduced by 75–95%, which seriously threatens the safety of infrastructures (Shiklomanov et al., 2017). For seasonal frozen soil region, frost heave is the main problem of constructions, accompanying with salt heave in saline regions. China and other countries have carried out a large amount of transportation, water conservancy and energy projects in cold regions. Maintaining project stability and reducing project safety risk are of great significance to promoting the sustainable development of cold regions. In this paper, we mainly evaluate the risk of permafrost and infrastructures, and summarize the common risk assessment methods at present. We assess permafrost from three aspects, such as the environment, forecast and disaster regionalization of permafrost. We analyze the thermal and mechanical stability of infrastructures (tunnel, bridge, roadbed etc.), and the risk of interaction between infrastructures and permafrost under multi-factors.
2. Permafrost stability evaluation
2.1. Evaluation of permafrost environment
From 1983 to 2000, there have been a lot of researches on the interrelationship between infrastructures and the permafrost environment. In the mid-1980s, the Canadian Geological Survey monitored changes of permafrost thermal regime in the Mackenzie delta, Tuktoyaktuk peninsula and northern Alberta (Brown & Hemming, 1980). Since 1991, Canada and Russia had monitored the active layer process, permafrost ground temperature, seasonal thawing depth and thaw settlement near the oil pipeline in the Siberian Nadym region and the Mackenzie river valley permafrost region for 8–18 years (Burgess & Smith, 2003; Smith et al., 2008; Smith et al., 2010a; Smith et al., 2010b). In 1998, Europe studied climate change, permafrost degradation, geotechnical engineering disasters and other issues (Harris et al., 2009). In recent years, China has conducted a large number of targeted researches on the interaction between Qinghai-Tibet highway and permafrost (Wu et al., 2002a), engineering geological characteristics of Qinghai-Tibet highway and permafrost process (Jin et al., 2008; Wu et al., 2003), the impact of human activities on the permafrost environment (Wu et al., 2002b), and the thermal stability and thermal thawing sensitivity of permafrost under engineering activities (Wu et al., 2002c).
The environmental evaluation of permafrost is mainly analyzed from qualitative and quantitative aspects. The qualitative assessment considers the effect of global warming and anthropic activities on permafrost stability and the disturbance of engineering activities to surface stability. The quantitative evaluation mainly analyzes the thermal regime of permafrost considering the energy change.
2.1.1. Thermal stability of permafrost
In the mid-1980s, the Canadian geological survey bureau used the monitoring data of permafrost thermal state to evaluate the thermal stability of interaction between permafrost and Norman Oil pipeline (Brown & Hemming, 1980). For the permafrost thermal stability, it can be analyzed from the following aspects: (1) characteristics of permafrost proposed by Galagulya, such as annual mean ground temperature, phase change heat, ratio of annual heat circulation to radiation balance(Zhou, 1985); (2) the ratio g/Q of the sum of the thawing energy between the roof of seasonal thawing layer and potential seasonal thawing depth and rising temperature at the bottom of the seasonal freezing layer to 0°C and the annual heat circulation proposed by Parmuzina (Zhou, 1985); (3) the influence of engineering activities on permafrost environment and energy stability (Zhigarew & Parmuzina, 1988); (4) because of the limitations of the Parmuzina method (ignoring the proportion of absorbed heat in warm semi-year and release heat in cold semi-year), comprehensive consideration of climate factors, surface conditions, soil conditions, topography and geomorphology, engineering disturbance and other influencing factors are proposed by Wu et al. (Wu et al., 2002b).
Using the permafrost stability classification of Qinghai-Tibet highway (Cheng & Wang, 1982; Wu & Tong, 1995), the change of permafrost table, and the change of permafrost ground temperature (Liu et al., 2000), permafrost thermal stability can be divided into four categories: thermal stability, thermal stability transition, thermal instability and seriously thermal instability (Table 1) (Wu et al., 2002d).
Table 1. Classifications of permafrost thermal stability.

Type	Annual mean ground temperature/°C	Thermal stability index	Impact of human activities
Thermal stability	<−3.0	>2.4	Human activities do not have major impact on the permafrost thermal stability
Thermal stability transition	−3.0 to −1.5	2.4 to 1.1	Human activities will change the permafrost thermal stability, leading to the instability of constructions
Thermal instability	−1.5 to −0.85	1.1 to 0.5	Human activities greatly change the permafrost thermal stability, resulting in the degradation of permafrost
Seriously thermal instability	>−0.85	<0.5	Human activities will lead to severe degradation of permafrost
The equation of the thermal stability index is ST = Qt/Q+, where ST is the thermal stability, Qt means the total heat of thawing sediment between the bottom of seasonal thawing layer and potential seasonal freezing depth and rising temperature at the bottom of seasonal freezing layer to 0°C, and Q+ shows annual absorptive heat by the soil in warm semi-year.
Based on the annual mean ground temperature, Jin et al. (2006a) classified the permafrost thermal stability in the Qinghai-Tibet Engineering Corridor (QTEC) (Table 2).
Table 2. Types of permafrost thermal stability in the QTEC.

Types	Extremely unstable	Unstable	Quasi-stable	Stable
Annual mean ground temperature/°C	0.5 to −0.5	−0.5 to −1.5	−1.5 to −3.0	−3.0 to −5.0
Permafrost thickness	0–30	20–80	60–120	100–150
Annual mean air temperature at the boundary/°C	−3.0 to −4.0	−4.5	−5.5	−7.0
Main distribution area	River valley, Talik, island permafrost regions	High plain and basin back margin	Low hills and extremely developed area of swampy wetland	Middle alpine zones
2.1.2. Thermal thaw sensitivity of permafrost
The prediction methods of the permafrost thermal thaw sensitivity include: (1) permafrost survey; (2) investigation of surface landscape disturbance scope and anthropic disturbance scope; (3) analysis of different periods of aerial photography; (4) comprehensive data analysis and prediction chart (Grave, 1983).
The influencing factors of permafrost thermal thaw sensitivity include: annual mean ground temperature, permafrost table temperature, freezing and thawing process and seasonal thawing depth. It changes exponentially with permafrost table temperature and annual mean ground temperature and reflects the sensitive response of permafrost under natural state and anthropic activities (Wu et al., 2002c).
The ratio of seasonal thawing depth to potential seasonal freezing depth is used to describe permafrost thermal thaw sensitivity:STe = X/XP (X means the seasonally thawing depth (m); XP means potential seasonally freezing depth (m)). When the value is <0.84, the freezing process is enhanced, and vice versa (Wu et al., 2002b).
2.1.3. Stability of permafrost landscape
The evaluation method of permafrost landscape stability include: (1) Considering the climatic conditions, the properties of soil vegetation, topography, and engineering disturbances, Greshchev established thermodynamic model of environment and space landscape in the permafrost regions of Western Siberia (Greshchev, 1982; Greshchev, 1983); (2) Considering the influence of characteristics of ice content in frozen soil, engineering disturbance, seasonal thawing depth and permafrost temperature, Wu used the formula SL = STei(STemeans permafrost thermal sensitivity; i means volumetric ice content) to assess quantitatively(Wu et al., 2002d).
The factors affecting surface landscape stability mainly include: (1) Mikhaylov removed the effects of vegetation and snow cover along the Baikal Railway on permafrost (Mikhaylov, 1980); (2) The disturbance of anthropic engineering to geological environment (Dunayeva & Gavrilov, 1983), for example, The degree of engineering disturbance and the relative ice content of permafrost can be used to classify the permafrost surface into stable zone, quasi-stable zone, unstable zone and extremely unstable zone in Fenghuo Mountain region of Tibetan Plateau (Zhang & Zhou, 1989), ②Based on the monitoring data of Qinghai-Tibet highway which has been in operation for many years, the change of permafrost table falling rate and thawing depth in embankment center with time can be calculated. It is concluded that the permafrost table has been unstable, and the decline rate of permafrost table in embankment center is gradually decreasing (Mi et al., 1998).
2.1.4. Engineering geological evaluation permafrost
Different scholars used different factors in engineering geological evaluation of permafrost: (1) The influencing factors of Beilu River test section in Qinghai-Tibet railway are permafrost type, groundwater distribution, ground temperature change and soil quality(Niu et al., 2002); (2) Permafrost type, thermal stability and ice content were taken into account in the Xidatan to Anduo section of the Qinghai-Tibet engineering corridor(Jin et al., 2006a; Jin et al., 2008); (3) The effects of freezing and thawing erosion sensitivity, thermal stability and ecological fragility of frozen soil were considered in the evaluation of environment in Muli mining region of Qinghai province(Cao et al., 2008); (4) Geological evaluation along the China-Russia oil pipeline (Mohe-Ulqi) takes into account permafrost and forest distribution, air temperature and ground temperature, ice content of permafrost, frost heave and thawing settlement of permafrost, active layer thickness, adverse permafrost phenomenon and stability of existing buildings(Jin et al., 2009); (5) The thermal stability and natural environment of permafrost are the main influencing factors of engineering geology along Chai mu Railway (Zhang et al., 2011); (6) The permafrost engineering geological evaluation of National Highway 214 considers the ice content of frozen soil, annual mean ground temperature, annual mean air temperature, active layer thickness, vegetation coverage, terrain and slope (Chen et al., 2014a). In general, the common point that most scholars consider is to analyze the natural environmental conditions and the properties of permafrost, and select different evaluation indexes based on the actual objects.
The methods used in engineering geological evaluation of permafrost usually include: (1) Analytic hierarchy process and comprehensive evaluation of the three-level division; (2) Catastrophe theory; (3) Analytic hierarchy process and interrelated method; (4) Catastrophe progression method.
2.2. Permafrost probability prediction
2.2.1. Prediction classification
The permafrost prediction includes the prediction of thawing settlement and deformation and the prediction of freezing-thawing hazard. About the calculating method of thawing settlement and deformation: (1) The way of calculating the potential thawing settlement and deformation proposed by the Russian B. A. Kudryatsev (Kudryatsev, 1992); (2) The model established by Corapcioglu is taken into account the material conservation between ice-water phase change and soil deformation when frozen soil melts (Corapcioglu & Panday, 1995); (3) The relative thermal thawing subsidence evaluation equation and the thawing settlement stability prediction equation were used to calculate the relationship between the seasonal thawing depth and the relative thermal thawing settlement in the natural state (Wu, 2000). Pian (Pian, 2006) forecasted the freezing-thawing disasters in cold zones by using the fuzzy comprehensive evaluation method and grey theory, considering geological conditions, human factors, engineering design and environmental impact.
2.2.2. Probability prediction
Considering the global warming, the thawing depth and area of permafrost are predicted probabilistically. The common methods include: Stefan equation, thawing settlement factor and consolidation settlement model, public land surface process model, climate model and algorithm combined with probability theory.
For the prediction of the thawing depth, Vinson and Bae (Vinson & Bae, 2005) proposed that the material properties, surface energy input parameters and the randomness of temperature data have an uncertain impact in the Fairbanks area of Alaska. In China, permafrost changes were predicted. The permafrost with a thickness of <100 m will disappear, and the permafrost area will be reduced by about 15% in the Tongtian River-Yalong River section of the West Route of South-to-North Water Transfer Project (Zeng et al., 1996). At the middle age of this century, the active layer thickness of permafrost on the Qinghai-Tibet plateau will increase, and at the end age of this century, permafrost will undergo large-scale spatial changes (Zhang & Wu, 2012a). The permafrost area in the northeast China will decrease by 28.4% and 49.8% at the middle and end of this century, respectively (Wei et al., 2011). (4) In 100 years, 5–10% of permafrost on the Qinghai-Tibet plateau will become unstable, and 10–12% of permafrost will become extremely unstable (Yang & Cheng, 2011). The permafrost areas on the Qinghai-Tibet plateau will decrease by 17.6%, 27% and 49.2% respectively, when the annual mean air temperature increases by 1.8°C, 4°C, and 6°C (Jiao et al., 2016). At present, most scholars used modern climate data to predict and analyze the change of permafrost. Their results show that in Siberia (Anisimov & Reneva, 2006; Malevsky-Malevich et al., 2001; Romanovsky et al., 2010a; Shiklomanov, 2005), Alaska (Smith et al., 2010b), northern Canada (Romanovsky et al., 2010a), the Arctic Circle (Romanovsky et al., 2010b), Northern Europe and the Northern Hemisphere (Levavasseur et al., 2011) and other regions, with the gradual increase of temperature, the permafrost areas would decrease and the active layer thickness would increase, and the obvious change occurs in the Arctic regions (Zhang, 2012).
2.3. Permafrost disaster assessment
2.3.1. Disaster analysis
The analysis of permafrost disaster considers the negative effects brought by climate change. The mechanism and preventive measures of geological hazards in alpine permafrost regions of Europe were analyzed (Harris et al., 2001). The freezing-thawing hazards in Polar Regions are analyzed by using the formula of thawing settlement of permafrost (Is = ∆Zal ∙ Vice) and considering the vegetation, the continuity and the thermal and physical properties of permafrost (Nelson et al., 2001). The thawing settlement state of permafrost in northern Russia were analyzed considering precipitation, vegetation, geotechnical type, temperature and other aspects (Anisimov & Reneva, 2006). Landslides in frozen soil areas with high content of fine-grained soil or ice-rich are mostly caused by the failure of drainage of moisture formed after the melting of underground ice and the decrease of shear strength at the ice-soil interface (Lewkowicz, 2007).
Erosion of rivers and waves (Burn & Lewkowicz, 1990), collapse and erosion of the lakeshore (Kokelj et al., 2009), material migration induced by extreme high temperature or precipitation (Lacelle et al., 2010) would lead to the exposure and thawing of underground ice. Scholars assumed the slope soil as continuous transition, and analyzed the stability of permafrost slope from the perspective of pore water pressure based on the Mohr-Coulomb criterion (McRoberts & Morgenstern, 1974a; McRoberts & Morgenstern, 1974b; Pufahl & Morgenstern, 1979; Skempton & Delory, 1957; Weeks, 1969), without considering the shear strength of the thawing fluid composed of rock，soil and mud in the surface layer of permafrost slope (Niu & Zhang, 2002).
Fuzzy comprehensive evaluation is adopted to analyze the thermal hazards in the study area near 364 km along Mohe-Daqing section (Fan et al., 2017). The instability of permafrost slopes is mainly related to ice content, slope, surface temperature and other factors. The causes of instability include: (1) the permafrost is exposed by human excavation or the thermal erosion of rivers and subsidence at the foot of slopes, resulting in degradation and thawing collapse; (2) the thaw of icy permafrost at the active layer-permafrost interface causes the separation and destruction of active layer (Niu et al., 2016). For the solifluction landslide, Jin et al. (Jin et al., 2004) analyzed the calculation equation of the slope safety coefficient with different water content from the same seepage direction and slope direction. For thaw slumping, Jin analyzed the formula of slope stability under different seepage conditions (Jin, 2004). Comparing and analyzing five common methods for calculating stability of thawed soil slopes and frozen soil slopes, it shows that in Tibet plateau the influence of pore water pressure and pore gas pressure on the stability of thawing-soil slopes should be considered and the stability of frozen soil slopes needs to consider the “ice resistance seepage” effect of the substratum of thawed soil (Shen et al., 2005; Shen et al., 2011. Dong (2017) has established a stability analysis method for permafrost slopes with framed thermal anchor pipe using the method of inclined slices and the stability analysis method of finite element limit equilibrium considering coupled hydro-thermo-mechanical interaction.
2.3.2. Regionalization of permafrost hazards
The methods used for the regional assessment of permafrost thermal hazards include: modified Nelson thermal hazards risk assessment model, active layer model, underground ice model, annual mean ground temperature model, regional climate model, improved DRASTIC model, analytic hierarchy process, ArcGIS, etc (Lu et al., 2012; Niu et al., 2015; Ruan et al., 2014a; Yang, 2012).
The regional analysis results of thermal hazards in the Tibet plateau are as follows: (1) At the middle of this century, the Qinghai-Tibet plateau presents medium-high risk under the scenarios of A1B and A2 and medium-low risk under the scenarios of B1. At the end of this century, the Tibet plateau is in medium-high risk (Ruan et al., 2014a; Zhang & Wu, 2012b; Zhang & Wu, 2012c). (2) Under the climate models A1B, A2 and B1, the areas with high annul mean ground temperature and high human activities intensity present middle-high risk, as shown in Table 3 (Zhang et al., 2012). In China, the BCC-CM1 model is used to predict future climate, and the model is divided into three framework levels: scenarios A1B, A2 and B1. In the A1B scenario, the economy grows rapidly and the temperature forecast shows that the temperature increases rapidly in the first half of the 21st century. With the decrease of population, the temperature rise decreases and the mean temperature increases at the rate of 0.04°C/a. The A2 scenario is dominated by the regional economic development. The temperature continues to rise and the mean temperature growth rate is 0.052°C/a. The B1 scenario is a sustainable economic development model, with a slow temperature rise and a rise rate of the average temperature of 0.023°C/a (Ruan et al., 2014a).
Table 3. Classification criteria for permafrost risk.

Risk regions rating	Stable	Low risk	Medium risk	High risk
Permafrost type(ice content)	0.08	0.08–0.25	0.25–0.45	0.45
Annual mean ground temperature/°C	<−5.0	−3.0 to −5.0	−1.5 to −3.0	0.5 to −1.5
Active layer thickness/m	<0.5	0.5–1.5	1.5–3.0	>3.0
Comprehensive value	0–0.35	0.35–0.55	0.55–0.65	>0.65
Disaster probability	Very unlikely	Less unlikely	More likely	Very likely
For the thawing settlement risk along the QTEC, the sections with high risk account for 35.79% of the total length, the sections with medium risk account for 22.39% of the total length, and the sections with low risk account for 41.82% of the total length, indicate that the thermal hazards have a larger impact on the QTEC (Yang, 2012).
For thermal karst lakes: the high-prone areas accounted for 47.97% of the study area, and the medium-low and non-prone areas accounted for 52.03% of the study area between Chumar River and Fenghuo Mountain along the Tibet railway (Lu et al., 2012). The development of thermal karst lake in the study region is related to high temperature permafrost, low vegetation coverage and low altitude (Niu et al., 2015).
According to the fifth IPCC’s report, it is estimated that the global surface temperature will increase by 0.3–0.7°C from 2016 to 2035, and will increase by 0.3–4.8°C by the end of this century. The global temperature rise will lead to the thawing, degradation or disappearance of permafrost. During the alternating changes of positive and negative temperature, the water in the frozen soil undergoes phase changes constantly, which will make its physical and mechanical properties have a large change, form a large number of unfavorable frozen soil phenomenon (ice pyramid, frost heaving mound, thaw slumping, etc.) and have a large impact on the environment and infrastructures. For the evaluation of permafrost, authors think that it can be analyzed from the interaction of temperature rise and engineering disturbance, comprehensively considering the uncertain influence of climate change, permafrost change and engineering properties. Then the development and different thermal hazards of permafrost is analyzed. Finally analyzing the changes of thermal conditions in the process of permafrost degradation, and the environmental changes of permafrost are evaluated synthetically.
3. Risk assessment of constructions in cold regions
3.1. Risk assessment of tunnels
Through investigation and analysis of the diseases of tunnels, it is found that 80% of the tunnels have common diseases in cold regions, 60% of that has leakage, and about 24% of that has some problems such as falling off and cracking of lining concrete (An, 2009). About 34% of railway tunnels in cold regions of Japan have freezing damage problems. Water leakage is the main problem (Wang et al., 2011). In Russia, Canada, the United States, Japan and northern Europe and other countries, the main structure of some tunnels has been damaged due to freezing damage, affecting the operation safety (Zhang, 2015b).
In the construction and operation of tunnels in cold regions, freezing-thawing problems are very prominent. Frost heave problems are mainly manifested as: (1) Frost heaving force causes part of the lining to be pushed out, making the structure unstable or the tunnel collapse; (2) Freezing-thawing action makes part of the lining fall off; (3) The lining is cracked because of the freezing effect, resulting in the internal structure leakage due to temperature difference; (4) Leakage occurs in the arch of the tunnels, ice hangs at the top of the hole, and the side wall of the lining appears cracks; (5) The frost heave at the bottom of tunnels causes the road surface to uplift (Du, 2017). Thawing settlement problems mainly include: (1) During the operation of long tunnel, heat dissipation is not unobstructed due to the tunnel is longer, which will lead to local heat accumulation in the tunnel; (2)In the tunnel construction process, heat accumulates at local zones due to mechanical or thermal disturbances (Wang, 2016).
3.1.1. Thermal stability of tunnels
The construction of tunnels breaks the initial thermal state of surrounding rocks. The tunnel lining will be damaged due to the deformation of frost heave and thawing settlement caused by the temperature change of the surrounding rock, and the heat accumulation during construction and operation will also cause the thawing settlement risk. Both factors will change the thermal condition of tunnels and affect the thermal stability of tunnels. Over cooling phenomena was found in permafrost tunnel (Yu et al., 2018)
Considering the effects of cooling, humidity control, soil cooling, ventilation, etc., the thermal stability of the Fox permafrost tunnel in Alaska is analyzed (Cysewski et al., 2010; Johansen et al., 1988); Based on this tunnel, experts from the former Soviet Union propose that the temperature inside the tunnel with a length of >2 km has a large range of changes, while the temperature inside the tunnel with a length of <1 km varies little. The variation of the temperature field inside the tunnel is affected by many factors. Because of climate warming, the temperature of a large number of frozen surrounding rocks is random (Wang et al., 2016b). Factors such as the hydration heat of lining concrete, anthropogenic thermal disturbance, exposure time of holes and seasonal thawing layer formed by surrounding rock thawing caused by tunnel construction and environmental temperature changes will all lead the depth of surrounding rock melting circle, the range of plastic zone and displacement of surrounding rock to gradually increase, make the temperature of surrounding rock decrease linearly, and affect the refreezing time of surrounding rock (Guo et al., 2011; Jia et al., 2005; Zhang et al., 2004; Zhang et al., 2007a). Inside the tunnel the air convection caused by the plateau monsoon and the increase of temperature after the operation all affect the refreezing of the surrounding rock (Song, 2016). Surface land temperature and ventilation convection have an effect on the temperature and stress in the vicinity of the inner wall of the tunnel, and the temperature difference between the tunnel entrance and the tunnel wall is caused by the freeze-thaw cycles (Zhang & Liu, 2019). Based on the unsteady heat transfer model, the factors affecting the temperature field of the tunnel are analyzed, the results show that the main factors are the buried depth of the tunnel, the wind direction inside the tunnel, the size of tunnel section, the wind speed inside the tunnel, the entrance wind temperature, and the thermal conductivity of surrounding rocks, and the secondary factors are the specific heat capacity and density of surrounding rocks, among which the most sensitive factors include: mechanical ventilation, train induced wind, surrounding rock storage temperature, air temperature and air speed (Li et al., 2017; Tan et al., 2014; Zhou et al., 2016a; Zhou et al., 2016b).
The insulation layer and cooling measures can cool surrounding rocks. (1) laying method of the insulation layer: The way of insulation on the surface cannot reduce the thawing depth of permafrost during construction and the way of insulation between two linings and insulation of the wall surface can make the temperature amplitude of surrounding rock smaller after the tunnel is penetrated (Fan et al., 2014); The way of insulation on the surface, insulation between two linings, insulation of the wall surface and double insulating layer can decrease the melting scope of surrounding rock (Yao et al., 2015; Yuan et al., 2018). (2) The role of insulation layer: in winter insulation measures hinder the refreezing process of surrounding rock; The insulation layer with a thickness of 5 cm and a thermal conductivity of 0.03 W ∙ m−1 ∙  ° C−1laid in the lining can prevent the surrounding rock from suffering seasonal thawing; The insulation layer between the initial lining and the secondary lining can reduce the depth of the frozen soil melting circle and hinder the hydration heat transfer of the secondary lining concrete (Yao et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2004; Zhang et al., 2009). (3) Cooling measures: In the case of global warming, the permafrost temperature in the shallow-buried tunnel section without heat pipe group increases with time, and the permafrost is cooled effectively in the shallow-buried tunnel section with heat pipe group (Zhang et al., 2017b).
For the analysis of the thermal condition of tunnels, it is found the thermal response of the surrounding rock to the construction is temporary and sensitive. The thermal response of that to the ambient temperature outside the tunnel is a long-term and slow. The monitoring of the temperature of Fenghuo Mountain tunnel and Kunlun Mountain tunnel shows that +5°C can be used as the environmental control temperature (Sheng, 2011). Therefore, considering the influence of surrounding rock thawing on the tunnel, the tunnel excavation is divided into: safety construction phase, relative safety phase, safety precaution phase and potential safety hazard phase, and the temperature control conditions for tunnel excavation and lining construction are clarified as shown in Table 4 (Tang & Wang, 2007a; Tang & Wang, 2007b).
Table 4. Control temperature and engineering measures for tunnel construction.

Load cases	Empty Cell	Empty Cell	Most adverse	Normal
Safety	Time/h		4	4
Control temperature/°C	TOP	<0	<0
Engineering measures	Normal construction
Relative safety	Time/h		8	19.9
Control temperature/°C	TOP	<2.0	<1.03
BARCH	<0.73	<0.30
MWALL	<1.59	<0.70
Engineering measures	Proper ventilation
Safety precaution	Time/h		34	92
Control temperature/°C	TOP	<3.54	<1.52
BARCH	<3.53	<0.74
MWALL	<2.10	<1.06
Engineering measures	Ventilation enhanced and network concrete
Potential safety risk	Time/h		125	92
Control temperature/°C	TOP	<4.67	<1.07
BARCH	<4.81	<0.93
MWALL	<2.21	<1.07
Engineering measures	Normal ventilation and wire-netting shotcrete with long bolts
Safety load	The temperature of surrounding rock and environment inside the tunnel is negative. All engineer procedures are normally conducted.
3.1.2. Structure stability of tunnels
3.1.2.1. The lining stability of tunnels
After excavation, the freeze-thaw will occur in surrounding rocks, and the change of temperature and water conditions will increase the impact of freezing on the deformation and failure of surrounding rocks, which will lead to various problems of lining structure, such as lining crack, peeling off and ice hanging, etc.
The stress and deformation of surrounding rock caused by freeze-thaw will affect the stability of the lining. The pressure caused by the freezing of the surrounding rock exposed to low temperature causes the lining deformation, and the instability and freezing depth of the lining are related to the integrity of the surrounding rocks (Wu & Wu, 1992). The frost heave pressure of surrounding rock caused by freezing-thawing cycle mainly threatens the safety of lining structure, and the most unfavorable situation occurs first in the position of arch foot (Chen & Zhang, 2013). Considering the degradation effects of freeze-thaw damage to surrounding rocks, the lining deformation, maximum principal stress and minimum principal stress are correspondingly increased by 20 freeze-thaw cycles (Wang and Yan, 2017). The maximum stress of the lining structure mainly includes the initial maximum stress and the stress increment caused by frost heave under the weight force (Hu et al., 2018a). The frost heave of standing water and surrounding rocks behind the lining (invert, middle boundary wall and arch foot) will not exert large pressure on the structure, and the increase of the frost heave force at the vault will lead to a sharp decline in the reliability of the lining (Gao et al., 2017a; Lv et al., 2012). The internal temperature stress of the lining exceeds the tensile strength of the concrete, resulting in the deformation of cracks, and the maximum thermal stress is located in the middle of the lining (Zhou et al., 2010). Sensitivity analysis of maximum and minimum stress of lining structure and maximum deformation of lining and physical parameters (surrounding rock, anchoring, initial lining and secondary lining) can ensure its reliability is above 93% (Liu, 2012). The reliability of the operating tunnel can reach over 93% considering the maximum deformation and maximum compressive stress of the second lining (Huang et al., 2017).
The internal frost heave of the lining is more harmful to the meso-structure of the concrete (Ji et al., 2012). Repeated freeze-thaw processes insides the concrete can damage the initial lining concrete (Lv et al., 2012). Temperature conditions, hydrological conditions and the pore state of shotcrete affect the frost resistance of shotcrete. Its damage process can be divided into four stages: initial damage stage, damage development stage, damage continuous development stage and complete damage stage (Hu et al., 2018b).
3.1.2.2. Surrounding rocks stability of tunnels
Under the background of climate warming, the freeze-thaw effect caused by the change of environmental temperature in cold regions has greatly affected the surrounding rocks, which results in the instability of tunnels.
Elastic finite element program and displacement inverse analysis method are used to analyze the sensitivity of mechanical parameters of surrounding rocks to the deformation of surrounding rocks. The order is: elastic modulus >poisson ratio> internal friction angle >cohesion (Lai, 2008). The thawing of surrounding rocks caused by the ambient temperature difference leads to local collapse and falling off of surrounding rocks (Wu & Wu, 1992). There is a positive correlation between seasonal thawing layer and surrounding rocks surface temperature, and the settlement of arch roof increases with the increase of seasonal thawing depth (Shen et al., 2015). The analysis of plane and space finite element model shows that the deformation and convergence of the tunnel section in the middle of the fracture zone is the largest (Lai, 2008). After the initial lining, the standard of surrounding rocks stability of the carbonaceous shale tunnel in the cold regions is: the maximum settlement does not exceed 780 mm, the deformation rate does not exceed 70 mm/d, the convergence value does not exceed 800 mm, and the rate of change does not exceed 45 mm/d (Huang, 2016). When the allowable deformation is 8 mm,the failure probability of Bahadaban tunnel will increase in the case of climate warming in the next 50 years (Cui, 2017).
The insulation layer is set within 600 m of the tunnel entrance and 400 m of the tunnel exit can mitigation the freezing-thawing problems of surrounding rocks (Tan et al., 2014). The 5 cm thick insulation layer can only prevent the lowest temperature transfer of 86.5%, and it cannot protect surrounding rocks from freezing damage (Feng et al., 2016).
3.1.3. Frost heave of tunnels
3.1.3.1. Effects of freeze-thaw cycles
Considering the extreme temperature −37°C, the variation of surrounding rocks displacement and lining stress is obvious with the increase of freeze-thaw cycles. Regardless of the attenuation of freeze-thaw strength, the safety coefficient of tunnel lining frost heave under the influence of seepage and frost heave of fractured fissured rock mass is 2.67, which can ensure safe operation (Hu, 2014). Field and laboratory experiments were conducted to study the effects of freeze damage on the Usui railway tunnel in Japan and the results showed that continuous water supplement and repeated freeze-thaw cycles were the main causes of weathering (Thomachot et al., 2005). For the first time, GPR was used to monitor the influence of freeze-thaw cycles on the lining structure of Fenghuo Mountain tunnel. The results show that the hollow area accounts for 1.99% of the total line, and the non-dense area accounts for 3.93% of the total line (Kang et al., 2010).
3.1.3.2. Effects of frost heave
The frost heave of rock mass is affected by water and heat transfer, and the frost heave rate increases with the increase of surrounding rock grade and weathering degree (Xia et al., 2013). According to the control variable method, the influence degree of each influencing factor on frost heave force can be divided into two aspects: freezing depth> the frost heave ratio of the freeze-thaw circle > the elastic equivalent resistance coefficient of lining (Zhang et al., 2017c) and frost heave rate >freezing depth >lining thickness (Yu et al., 2019).
Frost heave changes the physical and mechanical properties and stress state of tunnel rock mass in cold regions. The frost heave increases the difference between the radial stress and the circumferential stress of tunnels by about 5.7 times, resulting in destruction of lining (Feng et al., 2017). Increasing the thickness of the lining after the occurrence of frost heave damage has no obvious effect on improving the safety factor of the lining (Gao et al., 2017b). In order to prevent the damage of frost heave force on the lining, the effects of frost heave force on lining by different excavation methods are compared and analyzed. The results show that the principal stress at the invert and the sidewall with the entire section method exceeded the tensile strength of concrete, while the principal stress at the invert and the sidewall with the micro-bench method was less than the tensile strength of concrete (Yao et al., 2004).
3.1.4. Icing problems of tunnels
Because of frost heave, materials properties and construction quality, leakage problem of lining is serious and water freezes in tunnels (Fig. 1).
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (600KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Cases of icing problems of tunnel in cold regions of northwest China ((a) and (b), Tielimaiti tunnel, taken by W.B. Yu on Sep. 3, 2015; (c), Sailimu tunnel, supplied by Y.F. Zhou on Jan. 12, 2019).

It has been predicted that in the next 50 years, laying insulation in the two linings of Kunlun Mountain tunnel can actively deal with the water leakage of the tunnel (Zhang et al., 2007b). According to the groundwater indexes of the form of groundwater storage and supply and the situation of groundwater spreading into tunnels, the groundwater damage degree in the tunnel can be divided into 5 levels (Table 5) (Luo et al., 2010). The accident tree model of tunnel freezing damage is established from four aspects: the development of tunnel’s freezing damage, the lining peeling and breaking, water overflowing and freezing on the road and leakage and freezing of the lining, and the classification of frost damage of tunnels and influencing factors are analyzed (Luo et al., 2011; Luo et al., 2012). Under the influence of seepage and freezing, the freezing injury of tunnels can be divided into problems in tunnels affecting vehicle operation and problems affecting long-term stability of structures (Ji et al., 2012). The comprehensive analysis of fuzzy event tree shows that the probability of freezing damage of tunnel along Da-Zhun Railway is higher, the freezing probability of drainage ditch is lower, and the probability of seepage, lining rupture and both are higher (Fan et al., 2018).
Table 5. Harm degree of groundwater.

Harm degree	The form of groundwater occurrence and supplying	The situation of groundwater spreading into tunnels
0	No	Dry	No
1	Light	Little water content and no supplement	Small amount of water seepage and dripping
2	Moderate	Water-bearing and no supplement	Water seepage and water inrush
3	Heavy	Water-bearing and horizontal supplement	Continuous water inrush
4	Serious	Water-bearing and horizontal and vertical supplement	Perennial water seepage and water inrush
Considering the factors of climate and groundwater and using the comprehensive evaluation method, the freezing damage of tunnels can be classified into 5 grades: mild, light, medium, heavy and serious (Luo et al., 2010). The Likert questionnaire survey, ANP, and the fuzzy comprehensive evaluation method are used to establish the risk evaluation system of freezing injury of tunnels (Zhou, 2013). The analytic hierarchy process and the fuzzy comprehensive evaluation method are used to comprehensively select qualitative and quantitative indicators for the evaluation of the freezing damage level of the tunnel entrance (Table 6) (Gao et al., 2018). In positive ventilation, high mechanical ventilation speed (higher than natural speed) has an adverse impact on tunnel freezing damage, and negative ventilation is helpful to reduce freezing damage to some extent (Zeng et al., 2017).
Table 6. Grade classification of freezing damage in tunnels in cold areas.

Freezing damage level	Judgment basis	Mean temperature of coldest month/°C
I(no or slight)	There is icing phenomenon and leakage and icing of some lining surfaces in the opening section, and the freezing injury is slight, which does not affect the traffic.	−5 to −10
II(medium)	There is more severe icing phenomenon and leakage and icing of lining surfaces in the opening section, and the freezing injury is more severe, which affect the traffic.	−10 to −15
III(more severe)	There is serious icing phenomenon and serious leakage and icing of lining surfaces in the opening section, and the freezing injury is serious, which affect the traffic.	−15 to −25
IV (serious)	A large area of road ice appears in the opening section, the lining surface is broken seriously, the phenomenon of ice hanging in the cave is serious, the drainage system is blocked by ice, and the traffic is interrupted	<−25
3.2. Risk assessment of pile foundations in cold regions
3.2.1. Thermal stability of pile foundations
Thermal disturbance caused by pile foundation construction in cold regions changes the original thermal balance of frozen soil and affects its stable state. In particular, the hydration heat generated by the site-casting of pile foundations seriously affects the refreezing process of permafrost around the pile, and climate warming makes permafrost warming and deepens the active layer. These reduce the bearing capacity of pile foundations and affect its thermal stability.
3.2.1.1. Land bridge
The land bridge increases the freezing depth of soil around the bridge piles in winter, and reduces the thawing depth of permafrost in summer (Xiao et al., 2004a; Xiao et al., 2004b). The casting temperature of concrete and hydration heat of the cast-in-place pile foundation have large thermal disturbance to the frozen soil under the land bridge and last for a long time, which is easy to form a warmed frozen soil area (Wu et al., 2010a).
3.2.1.2. Pile foundation
The change of ambient temperature affects the strength of the frozen soil around the pile, which will impact the stability of pile foundations. The effects of global warming on the thermal stability of pile foundations are as follows: the suprapermafros water water and the rising of permafrost bottom will affect the soil temperature at the bottom of the pile, resulting in very small pile tip resistance and pile end resistance ratio (Shi, 2007); The suprapermafros water and ambient warming increase the interface temperature of pile-soil and affect the bearing capacity of pile (Shi, 2016). The pile foundation has obvious influence on the temperature of the soil around the pile. The permafrost table close to the pile is deeper, which causes permafrost to become unstable (Shang et al., 2017). Thawing settlement of the tower foundation soil threatens shallow buried (<5.8 m) unprotected foundation embedded in high temperature and complete frost soil (Li et al., 2016a; Li et al., 2016b). During operation the maximum thaw depth of the full-space pile foundation will exceed the structural depth and threaten the structural safety, and the cone-cylinder pile foundation structure can effectively protect the permafrost (Chen et al., 2014c).
The thermal effect of cast-in-situ concrete is related to the stability of pile foundations. For the cast-in-situ concrete foundation, thawing settlement and frost heave appear 1 month after construction (Liu et al., 2015a). The hydration heat has a large influence on the soil refreezing. The human disturbance, climate and techniques directly affect the thermal stability of the pile (Chen et al., 2018); The heat generated by casting temperature and hydration heat of pile foundation is dissipated mainly through lateral heat flow, resulting in the melting of permafrost around pile foundation, and the heat dissipation is affected by the thermal conductivity of soil and water/ice content (Guo et al., 2015); The thermal influence range of concrete pouring piles is 4–5 times of the pile diameter. Under climate warming, the effective freezing length of pile foundation in warm permafrost area will be reduced after 50 years (Chen et al., 2013). For the shallow buried foundation without heat pipe, the heat enhancement effect of concrete foundation makes the maximum melting amount near the foundation 2.0 m larger than that of natural ground (Yu et al., 2016a).
3.2.2. Bearing capacity of pile foundations
In cold regions, pile foundations usually adopt the construction method of site-casting. Under the influence of concrete casting temperature and hydration heat, the frozen soil around the pile thaws, and after a period of time, the frozen soil around the pile begins to refreeze, causing the interface between pile and soil to freeze, so the pile foundation has a certain bearing capacity. However, the thermal disturbance caused by pile foundations construction will change the frost state of permafrost around the pile, reduce the freezing strength of permafrost around the pile, and affect its bearing capacity.
Relationship between pile foundations refreezing and bearing capacity is as follow: The maximum mean monthly temperature at the interface between the frozen soil and the pile side surface is refrozen to −0.5°C, which is used as the standard for re-freezing of bored piles (Wu et al., 2004). Under thermal disturbance of concrete, the refreezing time of pile foundations is used as the basis for judging the bearing capacity of pile foundation and meeting the construction requirements (Cong, 1995).
The change of bearing capacity of pile foundations is mainly affected by the freezing force and thawing of frozen soil around the pile, the vibration effect and the horizontal load. When the freezing force is insufficient, the shear displacement at the pile-soil interface may reduce the tangential stress (Wu & Ma, 1994). Under the climate warming, when all frozen soil around the pile thaws, the lateral friction resistance and tip resistance of pile foundations are very small (Shi, 2007), and when pile foundations reach the critical instability, its freezing depth decreases, which affects the uplift stability of soil around the pile (Wang et al., 2016a). And under the same conditions, it is predicted that the interface temperature of bored piles will gradually increase and the bearing capacity of single pile will decrease within 30 years (Jiang & Guo, 2016). The soil temperature around the pile increases due to vibration, which will reduce the bearing capacity of the foundation to a certain extent (Wu et al., 2009). The control load of tower foundation design mainly considers the influence of horizontal load.
3.2.3. The deformation of pile foundations
3.2.3.1. The thawing settlement deformation of pile foundations
Under the action of ambient temperature and surface thermal disturbance, the permafrost around the pile will melt, resulting in settlement deformation of pile foundations. In the context of global warming, when the lower limit of permafrost is moved up to the bottom of the pile, the displacement of the pile foundation is the largest (Shi, 2007); The displacement of the heat pipe foundation is much smaller than that of the common pile foundation under the condition that the active layer of frozen soil is completely frozen and completely melted (Xu et al., 2010); According to the deformation monitoring of the bridge pile foundation test section in Qingshui River section of Qinghai-Tibet railway, the stability of the pile is assessed by the permafrost table around the pile and the pile foundation deformation (Mi et al., 2010).
Due to global warming and surface disturbances, the foundation soil will undergo large settlement after the operation of the tower foundation. In the next 50 years, the settlement deformation of the tower with buried depth of 3.7 m in the −1.0°C areas will be relatively large, while the settlement deformation of foundation soil with buried depth of 5.8 m in the −0.5°C areas will be relatively small (Zhang et al., 2016). The influencing factors of the vertical displacement of the tower foundation in permafrost regions are ground temperature, tower base frost heave and water migration. Permafrost creep is the main cause of foundation settlement (Guo et al., 2016). Both water accumulation and water infiltration in the foundation pit will warm the foundation soil and cause the settlement of the foundation, which can be controlled by combining heat pipe with vegetation cover (Guo et al., 2018). Based on the deformation monitoring of the 330 kV main network project from Yushu to Qinghai, the base of the tower has been in a critical freezing state, and it is judged that the deformation of the tower foundation is controllable (Cheng et al., 2014).
3.2.3.2. Frost heave deformation of pile foundations
Due to the negative temperature environment and the migration of water in the soil, frost heave will occur when the soil is frozen in a single direction. As a result, pile foundations will be affected by three kinds of frost heaving force: The upward tangential frost heaving force along the side of pile foundations mainly leads to the uplift failure; The horizontal frost heaving force causes the inclined failure; The normal frost heaving force leads to the deformation of pile foundations combined with the horizontal frost heaving force (Shuai, 2017).
The spread-type foundation has good extraction-resistant behavior. The measures of resisting frost heave including non-frost susceptive soil backfill, bevel foundation design, surface treatment and two-phase closed thermosyphons etc. can reduce the potential impact of frost heave on the tower foundation (Wen et al., 2012). The contact stress under the transmission tower without heat pipe shows seasonal changes with the change of air or ground temperature, and the cooling effect of the heat pipe can reduce the deformation of the tower base and lead to the occurrence of frost heave and high contact stress (Wen et al., 2012).
The formation of ice jams around bridge piers in winter in cold areas will reduce its stability. (Wang et al., 2015) establishes the ice jam stability equation combining numerical simulation with stress analysis, and uses monitoring data to evaluate the stability of bridge piers. Icing problem may cause frost heaving force and horizontal load, acting on bridge foundations, and then damage them. Icing-melting cycles around the pile foundations also corrode concrete and disaster risk of bridge increases (Fig. 2).
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (752KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Cases of icing problems of bridge in cold regions on Tibet Plateau.

3.2.4. The vibration response of pile foundations
The temperature of the frozen soil increases under the influence of seismic load. The results show that the soil temperature of the unreinforced foundation will be up to 0.5°C, and the soil of the reinforced foundation can improve the heating effect (Wu et al., 2009). Permafrost pile foundations with surface frozen soil temperature of −1°C or above are sensitive to temperature rise (Wu et al., 2010b). Considering that the temperature raises by 2.6°C in the next 50 years, the seismic response is the largest when the bridge height is about 15 m, and the reaction tends to be stable after the bridge span exceeds 8 holes (Li et al., 2005). When the earthquake level increases, the unstable slip deformation occurs between the foundation and the pile in the condition above −1°C, which affects the stability of the pile foundation (Wu et al., 2010b).
The vibration of the locomotive disturbs the temperature field around the bridge pile, causing the temperature field to instantaneously increase by about 0.02°C. The vibration energy of the locomotive is about 2% of the original value from the bridge deck to the base of the pile, and the maximum settlement of foundation occurs in the upper soil near the pile foundation (Huo, 2011).
3.2.5. Comprehensive evaluation of pile foundations
The fuzzy comprehensive method was used to evaluate the stability of the tower base along the Qinghai-Tibet ±500 kV electric transmission line from three aspects: frozen soil environment, natural environment and regional climate. The order of stability is: Tanggula Mountain, Fenghuo Mountain, Buqu River Area, Jiebuqu River Area, Beilu River Area, Chumar River Area (Qian et al., 2008). The causes of ice cone and pier subsidence of the bridge between Tanggula North Station and Tanggula Station of Qinghai-Tibet Railway were analyzed, including climate change, groundwater heat exchange, effective stress of stratum, etc. (Quan, 2017).
The loss rate of the dynamic elastic modulus and the mass are used to evaluate the durability of bridges in cold regions under de-icing salt and thawing environment (Zheng et al., 2012). Considering steel corrosion and freezing-thawing damage caused by the concrete carbonization and chloride attack, the durability of bridges is evaluated by the margin ratio (Leng, 2016).
3.3. Risk assessment of pipelines in cold regions
3.3.1. Thawing settlement risk of pipelines
Under the combined action of climate warming and the positive temperature of the materials transported in the pipelines, thermal effects will be generated on the permafrost around the pipelines, causing melting of the frozen soil around the pipelines and resulting in the thawing settlement failure of pipelines. Among them, the heat generated by the positive temperature oil pipelines has the largest thermal disturbance to permafrost.
In 1985, Canada completed the construction of the first buried oil pipeline in permafrost regions—the Norman wells pipeline, and conducted an annual internal inspection to evaluate the impact of unstable permafrost and differential settlement on the pipeline. Climate warming mainly affects the foundation of thermal insulation pipelines in warm permafrost areas (He, 2007). The ground around the pipelines melts at the beginning of operation without protection measures and forms a downward eccentric “thawing cylinder”. The disturbance of China-Russia oil pipeline to the frozen soil in colder permafrost regions is small, while it is greater in warm permafrost zones (Zhang, 2014); The soil around the China-Russia oil pipeline shows a warming state at 1.2–2.1 m, 4 m, and 5 m away from the pipe axis, and a seasonal thawing zone formed (Wang et al., 2016c). The positive temperature oil will cause the frozen soil around the pipeline to thaw. In 180 days, the thickness of thawing cylinder of China-Russia oil pipeline reached to 1.3 m (Yang & Song, 2010). Canada’s Norman wells oil pipeline used wood chips to reduce the melting rate of slopes. The design scheme based on the strain limit state was used to reduce the thermal disturbance (Wilkie et al., 2000).
3.3.2. Frost heave risk of pipelines
In cold regions, the negative temperature environment leads to frost heave of the soil around pipelines, and causes uneven vertical deformation of the pipe, resulting in bending, uplift and even fracture finally.
Water content, surface temperature, the increase of pipeline buried depth, pipeline diameter, the reduction of the flow velocity and the increase of inlet temperature will all cause freezing injury of pipeline (Chen et al., 2014b). Jin et al. (Jin et al., 2006b) introduces the deformation and overall stability of the Alaska oil pipeline project, Norman Well soil pipeline project and Golmud-Lhasa oil product pipeline project from the aspects of the moisture and thermal effect of the ambient temperature and oil temperature and differential frost heave and thawing settlement in permafrost regions. Field investigation of oil and gas mains in Noviy Urengoy area of east Siberia showed that the most dangerous frost heave effect in the negative temperature process can lift the pipeline in humid areas by several meters, and thermal erosion, thermal thawing and frost heave will occur at the same location (Fokeeva & Radina, 2004). Numerical simulation of two-dimensional frost heave model considering groundwater fluctuation showed that when the freezing front of the buried natural gas pipeline in Fairbanks, Alaska reached the permafrost table, the pipeline displacements stopped, and for the ground without permafrost, the uplift continues (Kim et al., 2008). Differential frost heave has brought many adverse effects to pipelines: (1) It may result in the uneven settlement of the foundation and pipelines (Zhou, 2012); (2) The deformation of pipeline near the interface of two kinds of soil is the largest and buckling failure may occur at the thinnest part of the pipe wall (Di et al., 2016); (3) Pipelines may be subjected to higher strain, and (Zhou et al., 2006) established a strain prediction model for the gas pipeline under the influence of frost heave. Based on the stress-strain relationship and deformation monitoring data, the critical value of pipe material strain, pipe axial stress, pipe axial force, and pipe bending radius can be predicted when it reaches instability (Huang, 2011). The seismic resistance of buried pipelines decreases as the degree of frost heave of seasonal frozen soil increases (Zhou, 2012).
3.3.3. Interaction between pipeline environments
Long-term observation of the interaction between pipelines and permafrost in northern Siberia shows that the interaction causes the accumulation of stress in pipelines, and the influence of operating time, corrosion and construction defects increased probability of failure, and then affects pipeline safety (Seligman, 2000). Through the Bayes method analysis, it can be seen that the reliability of the interaction between the oil pipeline and the environment in the frozen soil regions can be improved by using special embedding methods, insulated pipes, and overhead pipeline on the frozen soil (Zhang & Li, 2008). Global warming will lead to permafrost engineering problems (frost heave, thawing settlement, and ice jam) and environmental problems (vegetation destruction, desertification, increased freezing injury and oil leakage) of the Golmud-Lhasa oil product pipeline in the Qinghai-Tibet plateau (He et al., 2010).
3.3.4. Comprehensive evaluation of pipelines
Using analytic hierarchy process, uncertain analytic hierarchy process, triangular fuzzy number, the theory of fuzzy mathematics and other methods, from the pipe parameters (oil and materials), the types of frozen soil, the parameters of frozen soil, frozen soil environment, engineering conditions, the pipeline overall stability can be divided into several aspects: unstable, relatively unstable, generally stable, relatively stable, stable (Huang, 2011), the reliability of pipelines service performance is evaluated (Mao et al., 2013), and the risk factors of frost heave and thawing settlement are analyzed and quantitatively evaluated (Li, 2017; Liu et al., 2015b; Liu et al., 2019).
The maximum thawing settlement amount of foundation soil of the China-Russia crude oil pipeline, annual mean ground temperature of permafrost and ice content are used as evaluation indicators, and the frozen soil along the line is divided into: stable-better, transitional-good, unstable-poor, extremely unstable-very poor (Ji et al., 2010). Mo-Da pipeline identifies 65 strong frost heave and ice cone prone areas, 32 thawing settlement areas and 42 monitored slopes along the line for analysis and evaluation of frozen soil disasters (Chen, 2012).
3.4. Risk assessment of ditch in cold regions
In cold regions, the safety risk of channel mainly comes from frost heave, accompanying with salt heave in saline areas (Fig. 3).
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (715KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Frost and salt heave of ditch in cold salty regions.

83% of irrigation channels in Heilongjiang Province in northeastern China were destroyed by freezing-thawing cycles (Ge, 2004). A damage survey of 216 irrigation channels in Jilin Province showed that 39.4% of engineering problems were caused by frost heave (Chen, 2004). More than half of the concrete channels in the northern Xinjiang channel project are subject to different degrees of frost heaving damage, and some canal sections even have cracking, uplifting, collapse and other damage phenomena (Li, 2009).
Channel freezing damage refers to the failure of the channel when its strength and stability are damaged due to the frost heave or thawing of the foundation soil (Ge, 2004). The lining structure and the freezing action of the soil limit the deformation of the lining, so that the entire channel is in an ultra-quiet state under the action of frost heave (Kong, 2017). The factors of frost heave damage of concrete lining channels include: the water condition and freezing characteristics of the foundation soil (Cui et al., 1997), channel lining structure and lining material (Zhang & Wang, 2007), the geographical location and direction of the channel and other external environmental conditions (Chen, 2004). Channel freezing damage is divided into channel bottom plate and channel lining frost heave damage. The first category includes: the whole floor lifting, the longitudinal crack and the irregular fracture of the bottom plate; the second category includes: temperature crack, frost heave crack, freeze-thaw and sliding, frost and melt damage and overall lifting (Ge, 2004).
Based on the theory that uneven distribution of water content along the section of the channel bed in the cold areas causes the uneven frost heave, Yu et al. (1999) proposes the frost heave force model of the rigid lining channel. Through proper assumptions and simplified treatment, researchers proposed different types of mechanical models of concrete lining channel frost heave failure (trapezoid, arc bottom trapezoid, arc foot trapezoid and big U shape) (Lu et al., 2009; Wang, 2004; Wang et al., 2008; Xin & Wang, 2008; Zhang, 2017; Zhang & Song, 2007; Zhang & Wang, 2007).
Based on the mathematical and physical model of hydro-thermal coupling during the freezing process of the channel system, Li et al. (1997) numerically simulates the hydro-thermal coupling transport process of the channel unsteady phase transition. It is found that here is vertical and horizontal water migration during the channel foundation freezing process, and the moisture accumulates near the freezing position. The total water content on the side of the channel slope changes the most. Through the numerical analysis of the seasonal frost heave damage of a soil channel in Northeast China, Chen (Chen, 2013) discovers that the frost heave force generated in the range of 0–1.0 m below the surface of the channel will cause large tensile stress in the shallow soil, especially at the bottom of the channel and the lower part of the channel slope. The maximum principal stress of the shallow layer has reached 2000–2500 kPa, far exceeding the ultimate tensile strength of the frozen soil, which leads to the gradual erosion of the shallow layer of soil and the easy collapse during the melting stage. It was found that under the action of temperature, the total water content at the freezing and thawing fronts are very high, resulting in high tensile stress and heavy frost heave (Li et al., 2015). Combining the channel frost heaving damage theory and the catastrophe chain theory, Zhang (Zhang, 2017) establishes a chain frost heave failure chain model, and founds that the channel lining structure frost heave damage is mainly affected by the temperature, soil quality, moisture and other factors in the disaster chain. Through the prototype test in an irrigation district in Xinjiang, it is found that during the frost heaving of the channel, the decrease of ground temperature caused by the temperature drop will lead to the water migration of the channel soil, and with the gradual decrease of the temperature, its water content will increase within 60 cm. The deepest depth of the channel soil reaches 147.2 cm, the maximum frost heave amount is 13.1 cm, and the corresponding frost heave stress is 178 kPa. Through the numerical simulation of the channel, it is found that the central part of the channel has the large frost heave deformation, and the maximum value reaches 11.89 cm. The mechanism of water-salt migration in saline soils is studied by the unidirectional freezing tests of soils and model test. It was found that salt will weaken the water migration of soil during freezing. During the cooling process, the sodium chloride saline soil only produces the ice crystals causing the frost heave deformation and the sodium sulfate saline soil produces both ice crystals and salt crystals, which causes the soil to undergo salt heave and frost heave (Xiao, 2017; Xiao & Lai, 2018).
In the cold-saline area, the infrastructures face the risk of frost heave accompanied by salt heave (Xu et al., 1995). Because the strength and deformation of saline soil are more dependent on temperature, its salt heaving is different from that of general expansive soil. The reason for the expansion is the salt crystallization caused by the decrease of temperature or the loss of water. Among them, the sulphate saline soil is the most typical, and the crystallization expansion of sodium sulfate is the largest (Chen et al., 2006). Through the theoretical calculation of salt crystalline force of sodium sulfate decahydrate crystal and salt heaving test, it can be concluded that the salt expansion force of sodium sulfate saline soil increases with the concentration of sodium sulfate solution, and the salt crystalline force determines the salt expansion force. Sodium sulfate salt heaving mainly occurs in the positive temperature zone, and the precipitation of sodium sulfate decahydrate crystals is less at low temperature, mainly causing frost heave. Considering the influence of temperature on sodium sulfate saline soil, it is found that as the temperature decreases, the salt expansion gradually increases and tends to be stable; the temperature range of salt expansion occurs from 0 °C to the initial precipitation temperature of salt crystals (Wan, 2015; Wan et al., 2016). Ma et al., (2019) have established physical models composed of saline soil and crushed-rock layer, aeolian sand layer, impermeable geotextile and without measure. The test results showed that crushed-rock layer, aeolian sand layer, impermeable geotextile can effectively prevent the migration of water and salt, and can effectively reduce the frost heave and salt heaving.
3.5. Risk assessment of embankments in cold regions
3.5.1. Thermal stability of embankments
The thermal stability of embankments in the cold areas mainly means that the overall temperature of the frozen soil layer under the embankment always maintains the initial condition during long-term operation, that is, the permafrost does not degrade or some measures are taken to suppress its degradation. The thermal stability of the subgrade is evaluated by the change of the artificial permafrost table under the subgrade. The roadbed is in a stable state when the artificial permafrost table is higher than the natural permafrost table under the original natural surface (Yang, 2010).
3.5.1.1. Analysis of influencing factors
Based on the study of the Amur Yakutsk Railway, the Baikal Railway Test Project, and the Qinghai-Tibet Railway Test Project, Russian scholars VD Kargapolv and VG Kondratiev proposed that permafrost degradation caused the damage of embankments, and only ensuring the heat balance between soil and atmosphere and the frost state of frozen soil can guarantee its stability (Zhang, 2015c). The change of the thermal condition of the embankment affects the formation of the thawing layer, while the higher water content in the thawing layer will affect its thermal stability (Wang et al., 2003). The thermal static moment was used to evaluate the thermal condition of embankments under the south-facing and north-facing slope effect, and the bigger the value was, the more asymmetric the geothermal field was (Liu et al., 2017).
There is seasonal difference in ground temperature between the embankment cement pavement and asphalt pavement at a depth of 0.5 min high temperature frozen soil regions (Li & Sheng, 2008). When the global warming rate is 0.052°C/a, the heat absorption effect of the asphalt pavement and the south-facing and north-facing slope effect can reduce the stability of the embankment (Zhang et al., 2017a). The thermal disturbance of the permafrost under embankments increases by 2.8 times due to the heat accumulation effect in the test section of Qinghai-Tibet expressway (Yuan et al., 2017). The main factors affecting the thermal stability of the slope embankment include: annual mean ground temperature Tcp and the position and morphological changes of the artificial permafrost table (Table 7)(Yang, 2010).
Table 7. Thermal stability evaluation index.

Index	Tcp	Index	Artificial permafrost table
Stable	<−2.0°C	A	Artificial permafrost table rises into the embankment
Basically stable	−1.0 to −2.0°C	B	The artificial permafrost table is higher than the original natural permafrost table, but it is also located in the original seasonal active layer
Unstable	−0.5 to −1.0°C	C	The artificial permafrost table is unchanged in the original natural permafrost table position
Extremely unstable	>−0.5°C	d	The artificial permafrost table is below the original natural permafrost table
3.6. Embankment structure and measures
The height and width of embankments in the high temperature permafrost regions affected the stability when the temperature warmed (Li & Sheng, 2008). The increase of the embankment height will only temporarily reduce the depth of the permafrost table, and affect the thermal condition of embankments. Under the climate warming, the frozen soil under embankments and the natural foundation degrades continuously (Yu et al., 2016b); It is predicted that when the height of the sunny-shady slope embankment with the asphalt pavement is sufficient during the 20-year operation period, thermal stability cannot be guaranteed (Chou et al., 2009). The increase of the embankment width will lead to the enhancement of ground temperature and maximum thawing settlement (Ma et al., 2017).
The thermal stability of embankments can be improved by increasing the turbulent heat transfer dissipation of ventilation embankment and other embankment structures (Wang et al., 2003). The measures used to cool the embankment (air convection embankments, ventilation ducts, heat pipes, heat drainages or combinations of these) can significantly increase the permafrost table and cool the ground (Regehr et al., 2012); U-shaped crushed-rock embankment(USCRE) has strong winter cooling effect and summer insulating effect, and the thermal stability of the USCRE is better than air-convection crushed-rock slope protection embankment (Mu et al., 2010); The heat pipe slope protection embankment and the crushed-rock ventilation embankment in the permafrost regions have a good cooling effect, and strengthening measures on the sunny slope can avoid the sunny-shady slope effect and asymmetric settlement (Chou et al., 2015). The pre-cooled embankment can effectively raise the permafrost table and weaken the formation of the melting layer three years before the start of construction, and the optimal pre-cooling temperature is between −0.5°C and −1°C (Zhou et al., 2004). The crushed-rock layer of embankments reduces the permafrost temperature under embankments and promotes the accumulation of permafrost, indicating that the crushed-rock embankment has continuous cooling performance (Luo et al., 2018). The embankment without protective measures can reduce the frost heave of embankments by uniform geothermal gradient and reducing the temperature fluctuation of high temperature ice-rich permafrost, but it will cause the rise of temperature at the bottom of high temperature ice-rich permafrost (Qin & Zhang, 2010).
3.6.1. The deformation and destruction of embankments
The thermal disturbance generated by the construction of embankments in cold regions changes the initial temperature field of the surface, and makes the ice content and unfrozen water content in the frozen soil change to some extent, which leads to uneven frost heave and thawing settlement deformation of the roadbed under the influence of seasonal temperature change, and finally affects the mechanical stability of the roadbed. The changes of water and heat conditions in soil and the stress redistribution caused by them are the main influencing factors of roadbed deformation. The deformation stability of embankments mainly considers the total deformation and longitudinal differential deformation (Yang, 2010).
3.6.1.1. Deformation analysis
Based on limit equilibrium equation for thawing settlement of permafrost embankments, reliability theory and genetic algorithm, the failure probability of embankment center thawing settlement is 0.02% and the failure probability of differential settlement is 0.00035% (Qi et al., 2006). When the frost heave occurs in the embankment whose height is 4.2 m, the relative deformation of road shoulder is larger, and the ground uplift occurs about 1 m away from the toe of embankments (Huo et al., 2013). Using INNRS method, considering the factors of global warming, annual mean ground temperature, permafrost table etc., the reliability of the predicted embankment deformation (thawing settlement exceeds 10 cm) reduces gradually, and the failure probability increases gradually (Miao, 2017; Xu, 2017). The stability and settlement of permafrost embankment are calculated and analyzed from five aspects: original natural permafrost table temperature, ice content, embankment height, original natural permafrost table depth and high ice content relative to original buried depth of natural permafrost table(Yu et al., 2018a). The coupled hydro-thermo-mechanical model and the strength reduction method are adopted to predict the stability of embankments, and the stability drops significantly under the extreme temperature rise of 5°C, 10°C and 15°C in a short time (Liang, 2018).
Under the influence of heavy-load vehicles, the cumulative permanent deformation of embankments in seasonal frozen soil area is 1.35 times that of no-load. The driving speed only affects the permanent deformation of embankments to a small extent, and the cumulative deformation in spring thawing period is larger than that in freezing period (Wang, 2015). The frost heave deformation of the upper layer of embankments near Changchun west railway station of Harbin-Dalian high-speed railway accounts for 60% of the total frost heave. And it decreases with the increase of freezing depth (Niu et al., 2013).
3.6.1.2. Influencing factors of deformation and destruction
Surface water at the toe of embankment slope has important influence on its stability in permafrost regions (Fig. 4). It may aggravate or induce the decrease and loss of thermal stability of permafrost embankments by means of convection conduction, thermal boundary erosion, providing water for frost heaving, etc (Hu et al., 2014). The water leakage occurs in the depression on the side of embankments in the middle and east sections of the Russian Baikal-Amur Mainline, and the frozen soil in the basement of embankments thaws under the influence of water-thermal effect and the thermal effect of embankments, resulting in its settlement (Han, 2009). Under the global warming, a large amount of unfrozen water released by high-temperature ice-rich permafrost will cause the embankment to sink continuously (Qin & Zhang, 2010). And the deformation of embankments shows the characteristics of periodic freezing-thawing fluctuation and long-term creep settlement, and uneven settlement caused by the sunny-shady slope effect gradually increases (Zhang et al., 2017a). In warm permafrost regions, the lateral deformation of embankments is mainly affected by ground temperature and its variation. The sunny-shady slope effect causes the deformation of embankments to be asymmetrical, and the longitudinal crack caused by the differential settlement of permafrost will seriously affect the stability of embankments (Chou et al., 2010). The wider the pavement of Qinghai-Tibet expressway test section is, the larger the influence of sunny-shady slope effect on embankment deformation (Yuan et al., 2017). Under the background of global warming, when the annual mean ground temperature is lower than −1.2°C, the thawing settlement of permafrost is the main factor of the embankment settlement; when the annual mean ground temperature is higher than −1.2°C, the creep of permafrost mainly affects the settlement of embankments (Yu et al., 2013).
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (429KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Cases of surface water at the toe of embankment in permafrost regions ((a) Tibet Plateau, heat pipes were used to mitigate the settlement of embankment caused by water ponds and south-facing effect; (b) northeastern China, serious cracks collapses have appeared in the roadbed and north-facing slop because of the surface water).

Surface ponding affects the water migration and heat balance of the active layer under the embankment and during the freezing-thawing process, additional water will reduce the soil strength. The ponded water caused by thermokarst lake make the foot of embankment slope soak in water for a long time and soften or melt. The lateral thermal erosion will affect the thermal balance state of the permafrost under and around it, leading to the decrease of its bearing capacity and subsidence, cracks and other phenomena; The poundings formed by rainfall and snowmelt has non-uniformity in the depth of infiltration, which changes the energy of the active layer of the subgrade, water state and surface temperature, and forms thermal disturbance to the soil under it, affecting its stability (Hu et al., 2014). Considering the thermal influence of the depth of the accumulated water beside the embankment, Hu uses the model of the interaction between the accumulated water and the frozen soil. It is found that the vertical heat effects of the accumulated water in the four types of permafrost regions after 50 years are mainly manifested in the critical depth and the stable depth (Table 8) and the horizontal heat effects of it with the 1 m and 3 m depths in same regions after 25 years are mainly represented by the heat affected radius and the safe distance (Table 9) (Hu, 2018). Due to the high latent heat of accumulated water, a zero curtain layer (ZCL) with a thickness of 5.5 m will be formed inside and bellow the embankment after construction; The warm and ice-rich permafrost layer (WIPL) under ZCL is near the melting point all year round and slowly warms up with time. During this period, its compression and creep cause obvious settlement of the embankment and the accumulated settlement are close to 160 mm after 10 years of construction (Mu et al., 2018).
Table 8. Vertical heat effect of surface water in the four types of permafrost regions.

Permafrost regions	Critical depth of water	Stability depth
Plain of high ice-content with extreme high temperature	<0.5 m	Near 1 m
Plain of high ice-content with high temperature	0.2–0.5 m	Near 2 m
High altitude of high ice-content with extreme high temperature	0.2–0.5 m closer to 0.5 m	Near 1 m
High altitude of high ice-content with high temperature	0.2–0.5 m closer to 0.2 m	Near 2 m
Table 9. Horizontal heat effect of surface water in the four types of permafrost regions.

Permafrost regions	Heat-influence radius	Safe distance
Plain of high ice-content with extreme high temperature	<11 m	≥9 m
Plain of high ice-content with high temperature	4–11 m	≥6 m
High altitude of high ice-content with extreme high temperature	0–4 m closer to 4 m	≥4 m
High altitude of high ice-content with high temperature	0–4 m closer to 0 m	≥3 m
Prokukin and Peyriayev believe that the vibration load affects the stability of non-high thawing embankment (3–4 m) slope of cohesive soil (Han, 2009). (5) The embankment is in a critical failure state under the influence of its dead weight, the embankment is prone to shear failure under the combined influence of uniform load, dead weight or eccentric load and dead weight (Zhang & Song, 2008). Under the action of freeze-thaw cycles and train load, the freeze-thaw compression deformation and additional deformation of the seasonal freezing layer have a large impact on the stability of the embankment in seasonally frozen soil areas (Zhang, 2015c).
3.6.2. The comprehensive evaluation of embankments
Using reliability theory, analytic hierarchy process, fuzzy comprehensive evaluation method, entropy weight method, the theory extenics, catastrophe progression method and considering the type of frozen soil, frozen soil environment, embankment parameters, engineering conditions, climate change and other factors, the overall stability, reliability, thermal stability, and cooling effect of the embankment structure can be evaluated. The evaluation results include: (1) Thermal probes can improve the stability of embankments (Ma et al., 2009); (2) The order of the stability of embankments along the Qinghai-Tibet railway is as follows: Fenghuo Mountain, Hon Xill, Kunlun Mountain, Tanggula Mountain, Beilu River areas, Chumar River areas, Tuotuo River areas (Yan, 2013); (3)The permafrost embankments are extremely thermal unstable, thermal unstable, and thermal stable respectively, where they are in the Chumar high plain and Yamal River section, Liangdao River section and Hongliang River section respectively (Ruan et al., 2014b; Yu, 2018);(4) The frozen soil embankment of the Changchun test section of the Harbin-Dalian high-speed railway and the permafrost embankment of the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau are in a relatively stable state (Liu et al., 2014); (5) It is necessary to consider the influence of the time effect brought by the number of freeze-thaw cycles on the service performance of railway yard embankment in deep seasonal frozen soil areas (Song et al., 2017). (6) U-shaped block-stone embankment has the best cooling effect (Zhao et al., 2019).
4. Methods of risk assessment in cold regions
At present, there are two kinds of risk assessment methods: qualitative assessment and quantitative assessment. Qualitative evaluation mainly refers to the judgment and evaluation of onsite risks by experienced experts. Quantitative evaluation mainly refers to the use of relevant evaluation methods to analyze the interaction between various factors and the degree of influence on the stability and safety of infrastructures in cold areas, so as to predict and evaluate the risks of infrastructures.
The risk assessment methods commonly used for infrastructures include (Satty, 1996; Yan, 2013; Zhao et al., 2019): expert scoring method, finite element method, analytic hierarchy process, fuzzy comprehensive evaluation method, sensitivity analysis method, Monte Carlo simulation method, artificial neural network, catastrophe progression method. Each method has its own advantages and disadvantages (Table 10).
Table 10. Summary of engineering risk assessment methods in cold regions.

Evaluation method	Advantage	Disadvantage
Expert scoring method	Simple, fast and efficient	Greater subjective factors
Finite element method	High precision, suitable for simulating the changing process of various physical fields of engineering	The large selection error of the boundary conditions of the model, the approximate solution
Analytic hierarchy process	Structure clear, easy to understand, easy to grasp the relative weight of each risk factor	Greater subjective factors
Fuzzy comprehensive evaluation method	A clear calculation formula, convenient	Unable to derive specific risk value
Sensitivity analysis method	Multiple factors are allowed to change at the same time, and more sampling times ensure high accuracy	The amount of data required is large, and the calculation process is tedious and time-consuming
Monte Carlo simulation method	The fuzziness of risk factors in engineering projects is considered	The determination of risk weight is subjective
Artificial neural network	Strong adaptability and learning ability, dealing with nonlinear related data	The demand of historical data is large, and the choice of network hidden layers is subjective
Catastrophe progression method	Analysis of the problem of discontinuous change, simple calculation	Large amount of data required
At present, the most commonly used method for infrastructures risk evaluation in cold regions is the combination of expert scoring method, analytic hierarchy process and fuzzy comprehensive evaluation method. However, the biggest defect of this method is that human subjective factors have large influence, and it cannot objectively reflect the degree of influence of risk factors on infrastructures. Secondly, the identification of risk factors is only based on experience and onsite investigation. Analytic hierarchy process is used to classify the most representative influencing factors as the main consideration objects, but it ignores the fact that engineering risk is dynamically changing. The process of selecting the risk source should also be dynamically and quantitatively identified in order to comprehensively and comprehensively analyze the risk level of infrastructures. Therefore, authors think that the sensitivity analysis method should be used to rank and analyze the sensitivity of various influencing factors of engineering risks to the influence degree of engineering. And then analytic hierarchy process and fuzzy comprehensive evaluation method is used to analyze the weight of each influencing factor. Finally, the finite element method is used to simulate and predict the stability and failure probability of infrastructures during operation, and the comprehensive risk assessment of infrastructures is carried out.
5. Summary
In cold regions, safety risks of constructions mainly come from the impact of climate change and freezing-thawing action on structures, materials and subsoil. The risk sources of engineering safety in permafrost area are the gradually warming air temperature, digging construction, vegetation eradication and increased rainfall in summer. These cause permafrost degradation, and then lead to deformation of ground and constructions, at last the hazards of the constructions. As for the seasonal frozen area, cold weather, water and salt corrosion are the main risk resources of constructions. Frost heave and salt heave are the main factors leading to damages of constructions. This paper reviewed the researches of permafrost environment risk under the scenarios of climate warming. The safety risk researches and mitigation techniques of tunnel, pipeline, pile foundation, embankment and ditch/channel are reviewed, considering the actions of permafrost degradation and frost heave on structures from macroscopic scale. These former works provide good method and techniques to evaluate safety risks of constructions in cold regions and mitigation them. Also, they supplied scientific bases and enlighten for improving.
This paper does not review the engineering risks caused by microscopic damage of materials due to environmental effects in cold regions. Microstructure damage of concrete and rock materials caused by freezing-thawing and salt corrosion of concrete and steel in saline-alkali environment can be referred to other researches.
The traditional methods of engineering risk assessment in cold regions are the combination of expert scoring method, analytic hierarchy process and fuzzy comprehensive evaluation method. Their biggest drawback is personal subjective factors. The infrastructures instability is a dynamic process, and the risk sources have certain randomness under the influence of uncertain factors. Under the background of climate change, the interaction between environment and engineering is not well considered in the analysis of safety risk.
Under the background of environmental dynamic change, the interaction mechanism between engineering structure and geological environment, as well as the hydro-thermal-mechanical-salt coupled model are suggested to be studied to improve the prediction ability of engineering structure behavior in cold regions. The combination of traditional engineering risk assessment method and numerical analysis method considering the interaction between engineering and frozen soil is an effective way to improve the reliability of risk assessment. Some special factors need to be considered in the risk assessment, such as surface water accumulation, surface vegetation removal, excavation and the change of hydrogeological environment after construction.