1. Introduction
Given the demand for marine structures in deeper waters, floating structures have become key technologies (Wang, X et al., 2018; Wu, X., 2019). A primary challenge in the design of these structures is balancing the conflicting requirements of lightweight stability and high-strength resistance to environmental loads (Zavvar, E et al., 2025). Owing to its spatial advantages and lightweight characteristics, the compartmentalized floating structure is widely used. These structures, typically comprising two face sheets bonded to a lightweight core, have found extensive applications in offshore platforms, shipbuilding, and floating structures. Fujikubo et al. (2005). proposed an orthogonal steel plate support structure for interpanel connections. Tanaka, S et al. (2014). designed a series of internal support structures for decks with longitudinal stiffeners of various numbers, types and sizes. The structural support systems of floating bodies can take various forms and have different performance characteristics. And many researchers have performed hydrodynamics-calculations in the context of this challenge; for example, Zavvar et al. (2022). used a potential flow method to numerically simulate the hydrodynamic response of a lightweight floating platform for wind turbine, and it demonstrated excellent accuracy. The above research has promoted the study of floating structural designs with light weight and high strength, as well as their hydrodynamic characteristics.
Innovative support systems for compartmentalized floating structures have garnered significant attention in recent years (Fang et al., 2021; Fang et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2023). The four commonly used support systems are honeycombs, foams, ripples, and lattices. Recent comparative studies have revealed distinct advantages among these configurations (He and Hu, 2008; Banhart and Seeliger, 2008; Queheillalt et al., 2008; Schenk et al., 2014). Among them, the lattice structure has been widely used because of its excellent performance advantages. The density of a pyramid lattice sandwich structure is only 60–70 % that of a traditional honeycomb sandwich, but the specific strength (strength/density) is increased by 40–50 % (Wang et al., 2010). The sandwich structure, which is composed of a lattice structure as the core material of a floating body, can fully utilize the advantages of light weight and high strength.
Considering a sandwich structure with a lattice core as a floating body is based on a thorough understanding of its core deformation and the coupling mechanism between the panel and core under wave action. The theoretical framework for analyzing the mechanical characteristics of sandwich structures has evolved from the classic plate theories established by Euler and Timoshenko, with three foundational approaches emerging as particularly influential in structural mechanics: the Reissner theory (REISSNER, 1947), the Hoff theory (Eringen, 1951) and the Du theory (Du et al., 1954). The Reissner formulation remains prevalent because of its computational efficiency and sufficient accuracy for many engineering applications. Although their fundamental theories encompass the basic principles of sandwich structure analysis, their applicability to modern lattice cores is limited by inherent simplifications. For example, the Reissner theory, which supports high computational efficiency, ignores the bending stiffness and core compressibility of panels. Modern computational approaches have advanced through homogenization techniques addressing complex core topologies: Romanoff and Varsta (2005) developed continuum equivalence models for the lattice core bending response; Buannic et al. (2002) implemented asymptotic homogenization for corrugated core systems; and Xue and Hutchinson (2004) established constitutive relations for square honeycomb cores through representative volume element analysis. Recent advances in numerical simulations and experimental investigations have significantly enhanced the understanding of sandwich structures (Hyun et al., 2003; Uddin et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2023; Li et al., 2011). These methodologies demonstrate the effectiveness of equivalent continuum modeling in sandwich structure analysis, where appropriate kinematic assumptions enable accurate prediction of macroscopic behavior while simplifying the calculations.
Owing to the anisotropy of a lattice structure and the multiaxial deformation of a core beam, accurately describing it via traditional fluid–structure coupling equivalence methods (such as those equivalent to Euler–Bernoulli beams) is not easy. The mechanics of continuum media have proven indispensable for analyzing complex systems (Bernard et al., 2003; Shen et al., 2013; Balasubramani et al., 2022). The representative volume element (RVE) method provides a solution for realizing anisotropic continuum equivalence. Borges and Pituba (2017) used the RVE method to predict the heterogeneity of mesoscale concrete members. Similar studies include Pan, Y et al. (2008) and Liu et al. (2016). The above research on the application of the RVE method generally remains at the material or component level, without expanding to complete structural-level analysis. These works focused mainly on solid mechanical analysis and lacked consideration of complex load conditions under multiple physical fields. Li et al. (2023) used the RVE method to solve the continuum medium equivalent with complex conformational components, and the hydrodynamic response of the sandwich structure was calculated; however, this work is an analytical study under potential flow conditions, and idealized assumptions limit the achieved computational accuracy. In this study, the RVE method based on continuum mechanics is employed to investigate the anisotropic mechanical characteristics of lattice sandwich structures and provide fundamental parameters for hydrodynamic analysis.
The hydrodynamic response characteristics of lattice sandwich structures differ fundamentally from those of conventional homogenous constructions, particularly under complex marine loading conditions involving wave impacts and hydrodynamic pressures. This behavioral divergence stems from their inherent structural anisotropy and energy dissipation mechanisms within the core form.
Fluid‒structure interaction (FSI) analysis is a critical methodology for addressing hydroelastic challenges in sandwich structures, employing two primary approaches: analytical methods and numerical simulations. Recent analytical frameworks have used potential flow theory and structural vibration principles to implement FSI calculations (Fang et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2023; Jin et al., 2024). While such analytical methods support efficient parametric studies, their reliance on idealized assumptions often neglects critical damping mechanisms inherent in viscous flows and complex free-surface dynamics, limiting their ability to capture load transfer mechanisms between wave and anisotropic sandwich structures. In contrast, numerical approaches based on the Navier‒Stokes equations provide enhanced fidelity for simulating nonlinear hydrodynamic phenomena. These methods systematically resolve complex FSI processes, including wave breaking, air entrapment, and slamming impacts, through either grid-based (Eulerian) or particle-based (Lagrangian) formulations. Recent advancements feature coupled computational fluid dynamics–solid mechanics (CFD-CSM) frameworks (Huang and Li, 2021), smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH) techniques (Ye et al., 2019), coupled Eulerian‒Lagrangian (CEL) methods (Hirt et al., 1997) and the coupled computational fluid dynamics‒finite element (CFD‒FEM) methodology (Lakshmynarayanana and Temarel, 2019; Jiang et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2021). The coupled CFD‒FEM methodology has significant advantages in resolving three-dimensional wave‒structure interactions, particularly under strong fluid and structural nonlinearities. In these numerical calculations, complex structures are typically simplified as simple beam or shell elements, ignoring their inherent anisotropy and multiaxis deformation mechanisms; therefore, this approach does not conform to the true deformation situation of the structure and will affect future analyses of structural plasticity, potentially affecting the safety of the project.
The hydrodynamic behavior of lattice sandwich structures represents a complex interaction between nonlinear wave dynamics and structural mechanics, and an integrated computational framework is needed to capture their coupled interactions. Although homogenization methods and CFD‒FEM coupling have been applied in complex structural analysis and fluid dynamics, macroscopic fluid loads or microscopic structural stresses are typically assessed in isolation, and a bidirectional closed-loop framework that can be used to reveal fluid–complex structure interactions is lacking; moreover, some coupling methods simplify the structure too much, resulting in insufficient calculation accuracy, especially the inability to comprehensively analyze structural failure under real triaxial stress (Iijima and Fujikubo, 2018; Fujikubo M et al., 2003). Therefore, the advantage of the proposed method is the introduction of a tightly coupled continuum mechanics RVE equivalence method and a coupled CFD–FEM framework, which enable mechanism-driven analysis from the microscopic structure to the macroscopic wave response. This approach not only greatly improves computational efficiency but also, more importantly, supports the quantification of the anisotropic stress path inside a sandwich structure under wave loads, providing clear guidance for design optimization.
In this study, a pyramid lattice sandwich composite floating body (PLSS) with complex topology is designed (Fig. 1a). The complex sandwich structure is equivalent to a homogeneous sandwich panel (HSP) with anisotropic elastic matrix analytic variables using the RVE equivalent method based on continuum mechanics. The equivalent structure is then embedded into the CFD‒FEM two‒way fluid‒structure interaction solution framework. In Chapter 2, the out-of-plane shear modulus of the core is calculated and compared with that of the RVE method, after which the equivalence of the macromechanical properties of the PLSS and the HSP is verified; finally, the two-way fluid‒structure interaction model is verified via experiments. The hydroelastic response of the HSP under wave loading is calculated, and its unique dynamic coupling mechanism is studied. Under the new fluid‒structure coupling framework, the design of the sandwich structure can be efficiently and accurately optimized.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (2MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. A pyramid lattice sandwich composite floating body and detailed design.

2. Structural design and equivalent continuum model
In this chapter, a pyramidal lattice floating structure (PLSS) is designed, and the basic principle of the RVE method based on continuum mechanics is introduced. Then, the application of the RVE in the setting of the PLSS is introduced in detail. Finally, the accuracy of the homogenization parameters is verified via analytical methods, and the structural effectiveness of the homogenized sandwich panel (HSP) is also verified. Ultimately, the complex topological mechanical characteristics of the PLSS are equivalent to the anisotropic mechanical parameters of the HSPs.
2.1. Structural design
Lattice sandwich structures comprise two high-strength face sheets bonded to a lightweight core, thereby forming an efficient load-transfer system. The face sheets, with superior stiffness and strength, primarily withstand in-plane and bending stresses, whereas the softer core resists transverse shear. This configuration significantly enhances the bending stiffness by increasing the structure's second moment of area through increased face sheet distance. In this chapter, a pyramidal lattice floating structure (PLSS) is designed, which uses periodic beam-core units to optimize both the hydrodynamic and structural performance in marine environments.
The PLSS comprises three principal components: face sheets, a pyramidal lattice core, and a waterproof membrane, which mainly relies on self-weight to provide buoyancy (Fig. 1b). The negligible structural contribution of the waterproof membrane (due to its significantly lower stiffness relative to other components) justifies its exclusion from subsequent mechanical analyses. Scaling follows strict geometric, gravitational, and Cauchy similarity principles with a 1:100 prototype-model ratio (Ohmatsu, 2005).
The unit cell of a lattice core comprises two primary components: nodal bonding plates and I-section beam members (Uddin et al., 2024). Fig. 1b shows the optimized configuration, along with its dimensional specifications, as listed in Table 1. Table 2 lists the constituent material properties. The I-section geometry selection reflects parametric optimization studies demonstrating superior bending-to-weight ratios under marine loading conditions.
Table 1. Detailed dimensions of the PLSS cell elements.

Name	H	w	l	lc	hc	α	β
Unit Cell	0.023 m	0.025 m	0.025 m	0.024 m	0.021 m	75°	75°
Table 2. Material parameters of the PLSS cell elements.

Name	Elastic modulus/pa	Poisson's ratio	Density/ 
panel	1.92e9	0.49	412
Core	1.6e7	0.3	412
2.2. RVE method and equivalent continuum model
2.2.1. RVE method
The representative volume element (RVE) method serves as a foundational framework for continuum mechanics, enabling the homogenization of heterogeneous structures into equivalent continua (Omairey et al., 2019). As demonstrated by Blanco et al. (2016) and De Souza Neto et al. (2015), this method realizes the efficient integration of local heterogeneous components into the overall structural model through the transfer of component-level equivalent parameters. Initially, a numerical simulation based on a representative volume element (RVE) is used to analyze the mechanical interaction of heterogeneous characteristics in a component. The macro equivalent elastic properties of the component are directly obtained. These equivalent parameters are used as constitutive inputs for homogenized members and are embedded into the overall structural model to achieve a global characterization of local, complex effects. The homogenization framework of this method ensures the consistency of the mechanical response of components and dramatically improves the computational efficiency through parametric equivalence. Its core governing equation is as follows.
Suppose that the microscopic field is 
 and that the macro field is 
. The microscopic field can then be decomposed as follows (Sun and Vaidya, 1996):
(1)
where 
 is the microscopic fluctuation field satisfying the periodic or continuous boundary conditions.
The macroscopic stress 
 and strain E are averaged by volume as follows:
(2)
The constitutive relation is 
, where 
 is the equivalent stiffness tensor, 
 is the stress function, 
 is the strain function, and 
 is the volume of a cell element.
The finite element method provides an established framework for hierarchical material characterization, which is particularly effective for lattice–core sandwich structures, such as the PLSS. This methodology employs a computational homogenization scheme in which core anisotropy properties are derived through virtual testing of RVEs in ABAQUS. The process begins with RVE finite element analysis under prescribed kinematic boundary conditions, simulating fundamental deformation modes to construct homogenized constitutive relations. These equivalent properties then inform overall structural simulations through a nested solution scheme, effectively bridging the anisotropic effect of the discrete core with global structural performance. Analytical methods provide a basis for comparison with numerical methods, and the equivalent model and solid model, which are introduced below, are used for comparison and verification.
2.2.2. Numerical approach for the equivalent continuum model
To ensure consistent data transfer fidelity, the RVE analysis employs the same coordinate systems across fluid and structural domains. Periodic boundary conditions (Makov and Payne, 1995) are implemented via ABAQUS's MicroMechanics plugin (Riaño and Joliff, 2019), which uses native linear constraint equations to enforce RVE periodicity, which satisfies the Hill energy law proven in (Fang et al., 2021). As illustrated in Fig. 2, opposing face pairs (RNX/RPX: ACGE/BDHF; RNY/RPY: ABFE/CDHG; RNZ/RPZ: ABDC/EFHG) are kinematically coupled through reference points RP-Normal and RP-Shear at the coordinate origin. These constraints maintain displacement continuity across unit cell boundaries while permitting macrostrain application through directional degree-of-freedom (DOF) assignments (X: 1, Y: 2, Z: 3) governed by Equation (3) as follows:where 
 represents the displacement of the b plane or point in the a-direction, a represents the direction (1:x, 2:y, 3:z), and b represents the face (RNX/RPX, RNY/RPY, RNZ/RPZ, RP-Normal/RP-Shear).
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (398KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Representative elements of the PLSS.
(3)

Orthotropic elastic constants of the pyramidal lattice core are derived through RVE analyses under six fundamental loading modes (three axial tensions/compressions and three shear deformations). The basic governing equation is as follows:
(4)
where 
, 
, and 
 are the normal strains in three directions; 
, 
, and 
 are the shear strains in three directions; E1, E2, and E3 are the elastic moduli in three directions; G23, G31, and G12 are the shear moduli in three directions; 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
 are Poisson's ratios; 
, 
, and 
 are the normal stresses in three directions; and 
, 
, and 
 are the shear stresses.
Fig. 3 presents the RVE simulation results across six load cases, revealing pronounced anisotropy in the mechanical response of the lattice core. As tabulated in Table 3, the X‒Y plane stiffness primarily originates from face sheet bonding, whereas Z‒direction properties emerge from coupled beam‒face sheet interactions. Fig. 4 shows the continuous relationship of the stress concentration at the coupled deformation interface between the bonding table and the discrete core beam when the cell undergoes transverse shear deformation, indicating the ability of the RVE method to capture the coupled deformation of the panel and core. Notably, lattice beam members exhibit negligible contributions to the in-plane (X-Y) tensile and shear stiffnesses because of their discrete properties.
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (929KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. RVE calculations for PLSS core cell elements.

Table 3. Anisotropic mechanical parameters of the PLSS core cell elements.

Density	55.5369 
1,403,661.8086 pa
1,403,531.4666 pa
269,395.0123 pa
0.3005
0.05856
0.05525
543,093.0326 pa
26,734.9866 pa
26,932.0381 pa
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (648KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Continuous relationship of stress concentration between the bonded and core beams.

2.2.3. Analytical approach for the equivalent continuum model
The out-of-plane shear stiffness of the core has been proven to be an important mechanical property of the sandwich structure (Zhang Q et al., 2017), which is dominated by the coupling mechanism of the bonded table and the core beam. In this section, the accuracy of this feature described by the RVE model is verified via an analytical model. The out-of-plane shear stiffness is quantified via Sun et al. (2021)'s bending-dominated analytical framework (Eqs. (5), (6), (7), (8), (9), (10), (11), (12), (13), (14), (15), (16))).
The pyramidal lattice sandwich structure core comprises three primary components, as illustrated in Fig. 1b: the upper and lower bonded table and the core. To overcome the limitations inherent in traditional tension-dominant assumptions, this formulation accounts for combined tensile‒compressive‒bending interactions through the following kinematic hypotheses:
(1)
The upper and lower bonded tables AB and CD, and core EF of the PLSS are equivalent to those of the beams.
(2)
The bonded tables AB and CD resist only the bending load, and the core rod EF resists the tensile compressive and bending loads.
(3)
The bonded tables AB and CD and the core EF are fixed connections.
The PLSS core element cell with length l, width w and height 
 undergoes pure shear deformation under shear loads 
, as shown in Fig. 5, where 
 and 
 are the displacements of AB and CD along the z-direction of the bonded table, respectively. According to symmetry, 
, and the shear strain is as follows:
(5)
Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (217KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Schematic representation of a PLSS undergoing pure shear deformation.

The equivalent out-plane shear modulus of the PLSS core cell element is as follows:
(6)
According to symmetry, a ¼-cell element is selected for analysis, and the bonded tables AB and CD and core rod EF of the PLSS are all represented by the centerline, as shown in Fig. 6, Eq. (8), where 
‐
. The shear force 
 acts on AB and CD. According to the force balance condition, the forces at the left end of tables AB and CD are satisfied as follows:
(7)
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (196KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Schematic representation of a 1/4PLSS unit subjected to loads.

AB and CD have a bending moment of 0 at the left end as follows:
(8)
The following can be obtained from the above equation:
(9)
Equation (10) satisfies the force balance condition of the PLSS core EF as follows:
(10)
According to assumption (2), the axial force and bending moment at any point in the core rod is as follows:
(11)
According to the superposition method, the displacement of the upper and lower tables AB and CD at the left endpoint is as follows:
(12)
According to the principle of superposition, the displacements of the upper and lower tables AB and CD in the z direction at points E and F (the connection points of the table and the core rod, respectively) are as follows:
(13)
where 
 is the bending stiffness of bonded tables AB and CD.
The strain energy of the core rod is as follows:
(14)
For the above differentiation, the deformation of the core rod EF in the z direction is obtained as follows:
(15)
where 
 is the moment of inertia in the x-direction and 
 is the section area of the core rod EF.
The deformation of the PLSS core rod EF and tables AB and CD along the z direction is as follows:
(16)
The equivalent out-of-plane shear modulus Gxz of the PLSS is obtained by combining the above system of equations.
Table 4 shows the calculation results of the numerical model and the analytical model, which are consistent with each other and prove the accuracy of the RVE model.
Table 4. Out-of-plane shear modulus 
 of the PLSS core cell element.

Method	
Analytical	26,930.7019
Numerical	26,734.9866
2.3. Solid-based validation of the equivalent continuum model
Fig. 7 shows the process of the anisotropic RVE model. The bending performance validation of the homogenized sandwich panel (HSP) addresses critical operational scenarios where marine structures undergo cyclic bending loading from wave-induced pressures (Remery and Van Oortmerssen, 1973). Both the PLSS and the HSP models (0.961 m long and 0.025 m high) are subjected to the same boundary conditions (complete fixity at ends) and loading protocols (Fig. 8), featuring a 100,000,000-pa sinusoidal pressure (ω = 3.14 rad/s, 0.5 Hz) applied to the upper face sheet. Fig. 9 shows the temporal load profile. The displacement and stress distributions of the PLSS and HSP at 0.5 s are shown in Fig. 10. Fig. 11 a, b, c, and d compare the sectional bending moments (My) and shear forces (Fz) of the PLSS and HSP at 2.1 s and 2.5s. Fig. 11 e shows a comparison of the deflection curves of the PLSS and HSP under the action of a 100,000,000-Pa load. The boundary-localized difference arises from Saint-Venant principal effects and the mesh transition effect, constituting <3 % of the total strain energy. These edge effects have a negligible impact on the global performance metrics. The validation confirms the ability of the HSP to replicate 93 % of the flexural rigidity of the PLSS while reducing computational costs by 68 %, establishing its efficacy for marine bending load simulations.
Fig. 7
Download: Download high-res image (374KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Process of the anisotropic RVE model.

Fig. 8
Download: Download high-res image (363KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Boundary conditions and load settings for the PLSS and HSP.

Fig. 9
Download: Download high-res image (208KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Time-varying curve of the load.

Fig. 10
Download: Download high-res image (882KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 10. Displacement and stress distributions of the PLSS and HSP at 0.5 s.

Fig. 11
Download: Download high-res image (649KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 11. Comparison of the internal forces and deflections of the HSP and PLSS.

3. FSI model
In this chapter, the CFD and FEM methods, as well as the basic principles of their coupling, are introduced. The setting of the two-way FSI model is then detailed. Finally, the grid independence is verified. The effectiveness of the two-way FSI model is validated on the basis of existing experimental results (Appendix A). Ultimately, an efficient and accurate FSI solution framework is formed.
3.1. FSI method
3.1.1. Computational fluid dynamics
The numerical framework in STAR-CCM + employs the finite volume method (FVM) (Moukalled et al., 2016) to solve the Reynolds-averaged Navier‒Stokes (RANS) equations governing fluid motion. The coupled pressure‒velocity system is resolved via the Van Doormaal and Raithby (1984) approach, which employs iterative relaxation techniques to ensure convergence. Finite volume integration of these equations yields the following form (Anderson and Wendt, 1995).
Continuity equation:
(17)
where t is the time, V is the volume, a is the area vector, and 
 is the specified source term.
Momentum equation:
(18)
where p is the pressure, T is the viscous stress tensor, 
 is the combined force of physical strength, and 
 is the specified source term.
Energy equation:
(19)
where E is the total energy, H is the total enthalpy, and q is the heat flux.
The simulation of turbulence requires the introduction of statistical averaging, decomposing the variable into a pulsation 
 term and an average 
 term. The momentum equation is then as follows:
(20)
The new Reynolds stress term must be closed via a turbulence model. The 
‐
 model is used in this study. According to the Boussinesq assumption (Clarkson, P. A et al., 1984), the Reynolds stress and the average strain rate are correlated as follows:
(21)
where k is the turbulent kinetic energy and 
 is the turbulent viscosity.
‐
 transport equations:
(22)
where 
∶
 is the turbulent kinetic energy generation term and 
 are model constants.
The numerical wave tank is implemented in STAR-CCM + through a hybrid boundary condition strategy to achieve high-fidelity simulations of wave‒structure interactions. A velocity-inlet boundary condition prescribes fifth-order Stokes wave kinematics at the upstream domain. Simultaneously, a damping zone is incorporated at the downstream boundary to progressively attenuate the reflected waves, effectively maintaining the wave field accuracy. The volume-of-fluid (VOF) method (Hirt and Nichols, 1981) with compressive interface tracking is employed to resolve nonlinear free surface dynamics governed by the following:
(23)
where 
 is the volume of phase 
 in the grid element and V is the volume of the mesh element. The sum of the volume fractions of all phases in the grid element must equal one as follows:
(24)
where N represents the total number of phases.
3.1.2. Finite element method
The pyramidal lattice sandwich structure (PLSS) is discretized via the finite element methodology within ABAQUS (Bhavikatti, 2005), which employs solid elements to resolve both global bending and local core deformation mechanisms. Time-dependent hydrodynamic loads derived from CFD simulations are applied as transient boundary conditions, and structural responses are analyzed through implicit transient dynamic analysis, which accounted for inertia and damping effects. The governing semidiscrete equation of motion is expressed as follows:
(25)
where M is the structural mass matrix; C is the structural damping matrix; K is the structural stiffness matrix; F(t) is the load on the structure; and 
, 
, and 
 are the displacement, velocity and acceleration, respectively, at the specified time. The nonlinear dynamic equations are solved iteratively at each time step via the Newton‒Raphson method (Ypma, 1995).
3.1.3. Two-way FSI coupling CFD and FEM
The dynamic interaction between wave loads and structural responses in the PLSS constitutes a strongly coupled bidirectional fluid‒structure interaction (FSI) phenomenon. This study implements a partitioned cosimulation framework by integrating STAR-CCM+ and ABAQUS, employing an implicit coupling mode to synchronize hydrodynamic pressures and structural displacements. As illustrated in Fig. 12, the iterative process begins with ABAQUS, which predicts structural displacements at tn+1 on the basis of preceding flow field data (S0). These displacements are transferred via FSI interface protocols to STAR-CCM+, which subsequently solves the updated flow field (
) accounting for structural motions. The recalculated hydrodynamic pressures are then mapped back to the structural solver through conservative load transfer algorithms, completing the staggered iteration cycle. This tightly coupled exchange resolves nonlinear interdependencies between wave-induced loads and geometric deformations while maintaining temporal synchronization through predictor–corrector coordination. The framework effectively captures complex transient phenomena, demonstrating robust convergence characteristics through energy-consistent interface formulations and adaptive underrelaxation techniques.
Fig. 12
Download: Download high-res image (501KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 12. Two-way fluid‒structure interaction process.

In a coupled time step, STAR-CCM+ and ABAQUS can exchange data multiple times, including hydrodynamic pressures p, inertial forces I, and deformations D and movement M due to the PLSS; in this process, the convergence of internal iterations is ensured, and then the flow field information and structural response at this time step are obtained. The calculation is completed when the required calculation time step is reached.
Bidirectional FSI is achieved through the synchronized exchange of hydrodynamic pressure and structural displacement fields. The coupling process coordinates different mesh conventions: FEM cell vertex data are mapped to CFD cell center data using the shape functions of the fluid element, whereas the fluid pressures at the interface stored at the face centroid of the CFD cell center are transferred via least square interpolation. This approach explicitly resolves hydrodynamic added-mass effects and viscous damping through direct momentum coupling, preserving energy consistency via two-way field feedback. The strength of the methodology lies in its capacity to capture inertial fluid–structure interdependencies that one-way approximations neglect, which is particularly critical for marine structures under wave excitation.
3.2. Two-way FSI model
3.2.1. Geometric arrangement of the numerical model
The numerical wave tank configuration for bidirectional FSI analysis is illustrated in Fig. 13, which uses a smaller Y dimension to optimize the computational efficiency while resolving the dynamics in the X-Z plane. The domain spans are 4.4L, partitioned into three functional zones: wave generation (Zone 1: 0-L), workspace (Zone 2: L-3.4L), and damping (Zone 3: 3.4L–4.4L). The vertical depth includes the water depth (depth h) overlain by the atmospheric region (height h/3), with wave propagation along the +X axis and depth along the +Z axis.
Fig. 13
Download: Download high-res image (234KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 13. Arrangement of the numerical wave tank.

The floating body (thickness c) is positioned at 1.2L ≤ X ≤ 1.2L + l, initially resting at still water level before settling to equilibrium draft through gravitational‒buoyant balance. Wave gauges WG1 (X = 0.04L), WG2 (X = 1.2L–0.8L), and WG3 (X = 1.2L+0.8L) monitor incident wave fidelity and transmission characteristics. This configuration enables systematic evaluation of wave‒structure interactions while suppressing boundary reflection through damping. The key dimension parameters are shown in Table 5.
Table 5. Dimensions used for the numerical model.

Dimension	L	l	h	c
Length(m)	2.5	0.961	0.75	0.025
3.2.2. Fluid domain model
Numerical wave generation techniques primarily comprise source term methods and boundary input approaches. This study employs STAR-CCM+'s direct boundary wave specification, implementing fifth-order Stokes wave theory (Fenton, 1985) through the VOF wave model to simulate surface gravity waves at air‒water interfaces. The model activates dynamic wave-forcing boundary conditions (Kim et al., 2012) to suppress wave reflection.
The wave tank boundary configuration (Fig. 14) features the following:
(1)
Inlet/Top/Bottom: Velocity inlet boundaries prescribing Stokes wave kinematics with a turbulence intensity of 0.01 and viscosity ratio of 10.
(2)
Outlet: Pressure outlet boundary maintaining the Stokes-derived hydrostatic pressure and phase-resolved volume fraction.
(3)
Sides: Symmetry planes enforcing zero normal velocity and free-slip tangential flow.
Fig. 14
Download: Download high-res image (223KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 14. The boundary condition settings for the numerical wave tank.

This setup achieves nonreflective wave propagation while suppressing the wall effect, thereby optimizing computational efficiency without compromising the fidelity of the wave‒structure interactions.
The fluid domain is discretized via trimmed meshes optimized for VOF-based interface capture, following general wave simulation guidelines: 80–120 cells per wavelength and 10–20 vertical cells per wave height. A prismatic boundary layer mesh (y+ < 5) resolves near-wall turbulence gradients at fluid–structure interfaces. To handle structural motions, overset meshing (Chan, 2009) enables flux-conservative interpolation between static background and moving component grids, whereas dynamic mesh adaptation (Meng et al., 2023) maintains grid consistency during large deformations. Local refinement concentrates computational resources at critical regions (gas‒liquid interfaces and FSI boundaries) to balance accuracy with efficiency. The temporal resolution follows the CFL stability criterion as follows (Coats, 2003):
(26)
where C is the Courant number, which for the VOF method 
; u is the velocity of flow; and 
 is the time step.
In subsequent calculations, the time step is set to 0.0005 s. Fig. 15 illustrates the meshing strategy, with detailed grid independence studies addressed in the following sections.
3.2.3. Solid domain model
A three-layer homogenized sandwich panel (HSP) model (Fig. 16) with C3D8R elements simulates the global structural behavior. The 0.961-m-long configuration features 0.001 m face sheets and a 0.023 m core, constrained at ends by translational DOF restrictions in the X/Y directions and rotational DOF constraints about the X/Z axes. This replicates operational boundary conditions while enabling free vertical deflection. The specific size setting of the HSP grid is consistent with the size of the fluid grid for more accurate data transmission.
Fig. 15
Download: Download high-res image (2MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 15. Detailed settings of the model mesh.

Fig. 16
Download: Download high-res image (788KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 16. HSP creation process.

3.2.4. Cosimulation model
The synchronization of fluid‒structure coupling requires strict consistency in spatiotemporal resolution between domains. The temporal discretization employs Δt = 0.0005 s, governed by the CFL stability criterion, whereas spatial discretization maintains equivalent characteristic lengths across interfaces. Gravitational acceleration (9.81 m/s2) is uniformly enforced in both the CFD and FEM domains to preserve buoyancy-structure equilibrium.
Data convergence is ensured through a partitioned coupling framework, where each time step involves three bidirectional field exchanges between STAR-CCM+ and ABAQUS, with five internal iterations per exchange to minimize residual norms (Cox and Snell, 1968). As demonstrated by Lakshmynarayanana and Temarel (2019), this protocol achieves a residual reduction of 5-7 orders of magnitude across critical variables, satisfying convergence thresholds.
3.3. Mesh independence validation
A systematic mesh convergence study is conducted to optimize the computational accuracy and efficiency of the simulations. The verification enforces mesh consistency across fluid–structure interfaces while adopting directional refinement strategies.
Three grid resolutions (Table 6) are evaluated with base dimensions of 0.025 m (fine), 0.05 m (medium), and 0.1 m (coarse). Anisotropic refinement focuses on the following critical regions:
(1)
X-direction: 50 % base size (wave propagation axis).
(2)
Y-direction: 100 % base size (spanwise uniformity).
(3)
Z-direction: 2 % base size (vertical stratification).
Table 6. Details of the three grid cases.

Case	Base size	Water surface (X:50 % Y:100 Z:2 %)	Background grid (6 %)	Subgrid	Total grid number
Grid1	0.025 m	X:0.0125 m Y:0.025 m Z:0.0005	0.0015 m	0.0015 m	5,929,968
Grid2	0.05 m	X:0.025 m Y:0.05 m Z:0.001 m	0.003 m	0.003 m	2,909,989
Grid3	0.1 m	X:0.05 m Y:0.1 m Z:0.002 m	0.006 m	0.006 m	1,398,965
The background regions maintain a 6 % base resolution and are synchronized with structural domain meshing. The wave elevation comparisons (Fig. 17) show < 2 % deviation between the fine and medium grids, whereas the coarse grid results in a 5–10 % underestimation of the peak wave heights. Because that the medium grid has a 58 % reduction in cell count (1.4M vs 2.9M elements) relative to the fine grid with comparable accuracy, it is selected for production simulations. This balanced resolution captures over 95 % of the fluid dynamic phenomena while reducing computational costs by 40–45 % compared with the finest discretization.
Fig. 17
Download: Download high-res image (329KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 17. Results of wave generation via three grid cases.

4. Simulation and discussion
This study implements a validated hydroelastic framework to investigate the dynamic response of a homogenized sandwich panel (HSP) under fifth-order Stokes wave excitation. Nine parametric wave cases (Table 7) are systematically designed with wave heights 0.018–0.022 m and periods 0.84–1.24 s following an arithmetic progression distribution. Each simulation lasts approximately 20 wave periods (t = 20 s), ensuring statistical stationarity of the results while balancing computational costs. Nine strategic monitoring stations (Fig. 18) are implemented: Portside Monitor (m1; m2; m3), Midspan Monitor (m4; m5; m6), and Starboard Monitor (m7; m8; m9).
Table 7. Specific parameters of the working conditions.

Wave height/m	Wave period/s
0.018	0.84 1.04 1.24
0.020	0.84 1.04 1.24
0.022	0.84 1.04 1.24
Fig. 18
Download: Download high-res image (241KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 18. Details of the distribution of monitoring points.

This section is based on the exploration of the hydrodynamic response of the homogenized sandwich panel (HSP) using the RVE-CFD-FEM framework system, which has been experimentally and model validated in the second and third sections. The analysis follows a gradually deepening path (Fig. 19): firstly, it reveals how wave parameters control the transition of HSP from deformation dominated to motion dominated response modes; subsequently, it analyzes the mechanical mechanism behind this macroscopic phenomenon, namely the anisotropic stress transmission path within the structure; finally, applying the above mechanistic knowledge to cross-sectional topology optimization demonstrates the complete capability of the framework from phenomenon cognition to design guidance. Table 8 demonstrates the advantages of this framework by comparing the computational performance of PLSS and HSP under the same fluid grid specification requirements.
Fig. 19
Download: Download high-res image (625KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 19. The narrative path of Section 4.

Table 8. Comparison of computational performance between PLSS and HSP.

Project	PLSS	HSP	Gap (vs PLSS)	Physical significance
Calculate scale
Number of solid elements	201546	40051	−80 %	Geometric simplification significantly reduces the need for discretization
Total number of elements	931,921,6	290,998,9	−69 %	Uniform solid element distribution requires fewer fluid element couplings
Convergence performance
Internal iteration times	6–10	5–7	−20-30 %	Simplify physical fields to enhance numerical stability
Residual reduction rate	4-5 orders	5-7 orders	+25–40 %	Better convergence characteristics
Divergent risk	Diverge	Stable convergence	Significantly improved	Eliminating micro unstable sources
Fluid grid specification: 100 cells per wave length and 15 cells per wave height; 11 layers of prism around the structure
4.1. Wave‒vertical displacement coupling analysis
The normalized vertical displacement 
 is used to compare the motion and deformation responses of the HSP structure under the action of waves with different periods and wave heights. Readers can obtain the actual vertical displacement of the HSP through 
, where A is the wave amplitude.
The time histories of 
 at the middle surface of the cases through the monitoring stations m2, m5, and m8 (Fig. 20) demonstrate synchronized quasisteady periodic responses across various wave conditions, with middle surface displacements showing 20–40 % greater upward amplitudes than downward motions, which is a direct consequence of the fact that the larger crest elevations characteristic of fifth-order Stokes waves (Fenton, 1985) generate greater hydrodynamic forces during the upward motion, while the shallower troughs provide less restoring force during the downward motion. FFT analysis of the displacement at the middle surface of the HSP when the wave height is 0.018 m (Fig. 21) confirms that the significant higher harmonic energy beyond the fundamental wave frequency stems from two primary physical sources: the nonlinear pressure distribution of the fifth-order Stokes wave itself and the potential geometric nonlinearity induced by the structural deformation, which together modulate the response and generate these harmonic components. Spanwise monitoring reveals progressive phase delays from the leading edge to the trailing edge, governed by the finite wave velocity relative to the HSP's length of 0.961 m.
Fig. 20
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 20. Time‒history curves of the structural normalized vertical displacement of the middle surface of the HSP.

Fig. 21
Download: Download high-res image (311KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 21. FFT analysis of the normalized vertical displacement at the middle part of the HSP when the wave height is 0.018 m.

Fig. 22 shows the spatial‒temporal evolution of the normalized vertical displacement (
) along the HSP's length direction (X/L) under various wave conditions, capturing wave nonlinear response characteristics during the dynamic steady-state phase (t = 15–17 s). The gray tracks, sampled at 0.05 s intervals, reveal normalized vertical displacements of the structural cross section at different moments. Envelope analyses (red/blue curves) quantify the maximum upward (DZmax) and downward (DZmin) displacements at each cross-section. Two distinct modal patterns emerge: (1) For high-steepness waves (short wave periods and significant wave heights), bidirectional reaction force arching generates 18–22 % greater edge displacements (X/L = 0.1 and 0.9) versus the midspan, and the reason is that for high-steepness waves, the rapid change in momentum during impact creates a "stress arch" that transfers load directly to the supports, which is characteristic of clamped beam dynamics under concentrated wave slamming due to the rapid change in flow velocity (Fig. 25). (2) Long-period waves exhibit monotonic displacement amplification (11–15 % increase from X/L = 0.1 to 0.9), of which the dominant effect is the progressive propagation of wave energy along the structure. The fifth-order Stokes kinematics cause this energy to constructively focus towards the trailing edge. The envelope difference validates the framework's capacity to resolve both linear bending modes and nonlinear wave-structure phenomena, which are critical for a marine structural design that integrates multiorder hydrodynamic forcing.
Fig. 22
Download: Download high-res image (2MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 22. Variation in the vertical displacement of the HSP along the x-direction of the plate length.

Fig. 23 shows the dependence of the normalized vertical displacement envelope (DZmax; DZmin) on the wave period for a fixed wave height of 0.018 m, with similar trends observed across other wave heights (omitted for conciseness). The absolute values of DZmax and DZmin exhibit monotonic growth (18–22 % increase per 0.2 s period increment), which is consistent with the analytical findings of Guoheng and Hui (2025). This behavior arises from hydrodynamic–structural coupling governed by the wavelength-to-structure-length ratio (λ/L), which is maintained at 1–3 in the present study.
Fig. 23
Download: Download high-res image (293KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 23. Maximum and minimum normalized vertical displacements of the HSP during three periods when the wave height is 0.018 m.

4.2. Hydrodynamic characteristics
Fig. 24 shows the hydrodynamic pressure distribution on the HSP under wave loading, revealing that transient pressure changes are correlated with wave phase transitions. Fig. 25 shows the flow velocity field within the HSP working zone for the representative case (H = 0.018 m, T = 1.04 s), with velocity vectors sampled at 0.5 s intervals during the quasistationary phase (t = 10−11.5 s). The analysis shows significant velocity gradients at the end of the HSP. According to Bernoulli's principle, this local acceleration must lead to a reduction in static pressure, which in turn amplifies the dynamic pressure imposed on the structure. This fundamental fluid-mechanical mechanism explains the consistently enhanced dynamic pressures observed at the ends compared to the midspan.
Fig. 24
Download: Download high-res image (888KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 24. Changes in water pressure at the HSP under wave action.

Fig. 25
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 25. Flow velocity distribution of fluids in the HSP working area.

Fig. 26 shows the time series of water surface elevations at locations WG1, WG2, and WG3 (for example, three cases when the wave height is 0.018 m). According to the time series of water surface elevations of WG3 and WG1 between T1 and T2, the incident wave height 
 and the reflected wave height 
 are solved on the basis of the two-point method (Goda and Suzuki, 1976). The transmitted wave height 
 can be obtained from the water surface elevation time series at WG2. The reflection coefficient 
 and transmission coefficient 
 reflect the effect of HSP motion on the waves, which can be calculated as follows:
(27)
(28)
Fig. 26
Download: Download high-res image (936KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 26. Time series of water surface elevations at locations WG1, WG2, and WG3.

Then, the energy dissipation coefficient 
 in the numerical simulation can be defined as follows:
(29)
The hydrodynamic coefficients for the H = 0.018 m series are shown in Fig. 27, where the reflection coefficient 
 and the numerical dissipation coefficient 
 decrease with increasing period and the transmission coefficient 
 increases with increasing period. These phenomena stem from the transformation of energy allocation pathways. Under long-period waves, the structure's transition to compliant, rigid-body motion diverts a greater fraction of wave energy into transmission. This reallocation naturally reduces the energy available for reflection, a process aided by improved phase matching. Simultaneously, the lower vibration frequency decreases the efficacy of frequency-dependent dissipation mechanisms in the fluid, leading to a reduction in 
. In a word, transmission enhancement originates from the adaptive motion of the structure to long-period waves; reflection reduction is related to phase matching and energy absorption mechanisms; and the frequency dependence of flow dissipation dominates dissipation reduction.
Fig. 27
Download: Download high-res image (221KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 27. Hydrodynamic coefficients for the H = 0.018 m series.

4.3. Coupled wave–homogenization stress analysis
In Sections 4.1 Wave‒vertical displacement coupling analysis, 4.2 Hydrodynamic characteristics, detailed macroscopic structural responses and hydrodynamic characteristics are analyzed and their intrinsic connections are revealed. In order to fully understand these phenomena, the following exploration of the distribution of anisotropic stresses in the face sheet and core aims to find the role of the panel and core in transmitting hydrodynamic forces, thereby linking external forces and structural performance.
The homogenized stress fields S11 and S13 derived for the HSP effectively characterize the macroscopic mechanical behavior of the PLSS, which is associated with two critical failure mechanisms under wave loading: face sheet tensile/compressive failure (S11) and core shear failure (S13) (Jin et al., 2024). Fig. 28 schematizes the classic sandwich theory framework, where bending moments MS arise mainly from membrane stresses in thin face sheets, whereas transverse shear forces SX are sustained by the shear stiffness of the core. This study assumes that midplane homogenized stresses represent global structural responses. Fig. 29, Fig. 30, Fig. 31 show the time history curves of S11 and S13 for the upper face sheet of the HSP (corresponding to monitoring points m1, m4, and m7), the core layer (corresponding to monitoring points m2, m5, and m8), and the lower face sheet (corresponding to monitoring points m3, m6, and m9). The horizontal axis represents the normalized time t/T. The vertical axis is the homogenized stress HS. Table 9 shows the definitions of the homogenized stress components.
Fig. 28
Download: Download high-res image (226KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 28. Mechanical model of the classical sandwich panel theory.

Fig. 29
Download: Download high-res image (689KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 29. Time–history curves of S11 and S13 of the HSP when the wave height is 0.018 m.

Fig. 30
Download: Download high-res image (656KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 30. Time–history curves of S11 and S13 of the HSP when the wave height is 0.020 m.

Fig. 31
Download: Download high-res image (667KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 31. Time–history curves of S11 and S13 of the HSP when the wave height is 0.022 m.

Table 9. Definition of the homogenized stress components.

Component	Definitions	Positive	Negative
S11	Normal stress in wave propagation direction (X)	Tensile stress (element stretched outward)	Compressive stress (element compressed inward)
S13	Transverse shear stress (X-Z plane)	Counterclockwise shear rotation (viewed + X)	Clockwise shear rotation
The homogenized stress (HS) distributions in the HSP exhibit distinct mechanical features across its components, as evidenced in Fig. 29, Fig. 30, Fig. 31. Face sheets (upper and lower panels) demonstrate predominant normal stress (S11), with shear stress (S13) magnitudes three orders of magnitude smaller (S13/S11 < 0.1 %), which is consistent across the entire span. Conversely, the core displays pronounced shear dominance, particularly at the midspan (X/L = 0.5). In the following discussion, we analyze the distributions of the core's S11 and S13 stress components along the length of the HSP in more detail.
Fig. 32, Fig. 33 are similar to Fig. 22, where the dimensional homogenized stress components are mapped along the length direction of the HSP (X/L). Unlike the normalized representations in the previous figures, these plots quantify the physical stress magnitudes critical for engineering design validation. While wave height variations primarily scale stress amplitudes proportionally, the underlying distribution patterns remain consistent across cases. To explore the fundamental mechanisms, this analysis focuses on the H = 0.018 m condition.
Fig. 32
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 32. Variation in the homogenized stress S11 along the length X direction of the HSP.

Fig. 33
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 33. Variation in the homogenized stress S13 along the length X direction of the HSP.

Fig. 32 shows the spatiotemporal evolution of the homogenized normal stress (S11) across the upper panel, core, and lower panel of the HSP under various wave periods (0.84 s, 1.04 s, and 1.24 s). The normal stress envelopes in the upper and lower panels are similar in both value and behavior. The absolute values of S11max and S11min at both ends are greater than that at the midspan, with the absolute value of S11max exceeding that of S11min. The significantly higher stress at both ends is due to the influence of fixed end boundary conditions, which limit rotation and generate large bending moments. The observed asymmetry of S11max and S11min is a direct result of the nonlinear hydrodynamic pressure field: sharper and stronger pressure peaks under the wave crest produce stronger structural responses, and this load transfer mechanism also leads to the asymmetry of vertical displacement in Section 4.1. S11max gradually decreases from both ends to a minimum in the middle, whereas S11min decreases from the ends to the region near the middle, after which it remains relatively smooth. The core exhibits normal stresses three orders of magnitude lower than those in the face sheets, which is attributable to its substantially reduced elastic modulus. The normal stress envelopes S11max and S11min within the core remain predominantly positive, with the lower envelope (S11min) exhibiting reduced curvature compared with its upper counterpart. Both envelopes demonstrate progressive attenuation in absolute magnitude from the structural extremities toward the midspan. The inverse correlation between the normal stress magnitude and wave period contrasts with the positive period‒displacement relation observed in the normalized vertical responses. This comparison reveals a fundamental change in energy allocation. Under the action of short period waves, rapid forcing favors the deformation path: wave energy is absorbed and dissipated slowly through structural strain, resulting in high stress but limited overall motion (Section 4.1) and low wave propagation (Section 4.2). On the contrary, long-period waves promote the dynamic path: slower forces enable the structure to convert wave energy into coordinated rigid motion, resulting in greater displacement (Section 4.1) and higher wave transmittance (Section 4.2), while lower strain rates minimize internal stress. Therefore, the changes in these two states are mainly determined by the frequency dependence of the energy path, and Fig. 34 quantifies this mechanism.
Fig. 34
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 34. Variation in the maximum and minimum values of the homogenizing stress HS with the wave period when the wave height is 0.018 m.

Fig. 33 mirrors the analytical framework of Fig. 32, which maps homogenized shear stress S13 distributions across the upper, core, and lower panels of the HSP at wave periods of 0.84 s, 1.04 s, and 1.24 s. While face sheets remain predominantly governed by normal stresses, their shear stress profiles still have certain engineering significance. The asymmetric shear envelopes between the upper and lower face sheets reflect phase-reversed shear coupling mechanisms, with the maximum absolute values of S13max and S13min localized at nearly X/L = 0.25 and X/L = 0.75, decreasing to null values at the structural ends. The core shear stresses, although an order of magnitude less than those of the face sheets, exhibit symmetric parabolic distributions peaking at the midspan (X/L = 0.5) which is the sign of its primary function: transmitting transverse shear force, similar to the web of an I-beam. The consistent attenuation of shear stress with increasing wave period in all components indicates that the response is governed by inertial effects and strain-rate sensitivity, as detailed for normal stresses. This indicates that the same physical mechanism simultaneously controls the magnitude of normal stress and shear stress (Fig. 34).
Compared with the face sheets, the core demonstrates a less distinct disparity between the homogenized normal stress S11 and shear stress S13. Fig. 35 shows their envelope distributions under varying wave periods (T = 0.84−1.24 s) at H = 0.018 m, revealing spatial stress dominance transitions: at the ends, the core is constrained against free lateral deformation, activating significant normal stresses (S11) through the Poisson effect as it resists transverse compression/extension. In contrast, at the midspan, the core is primarily subjected to transverse shear deformation, causing the HSP to bend and thereby making shear stress (S13) the dominant component. To show the homogenized stress distribution law of the HSP more intuitively, Fig. 36 shows the distributions of the homogenized normal stress S11 and shear stress S13 from 10 s to 11.5 s for the HSP when the wave height is 0.018 m with a period of 1.24 s.
Fig. 35
Download: Download high-res image (466KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 35. Envelopes of the core normal and shear stresses for different wave periods at a wave height of 0.018 m.

Fig. 36
Download: Download high-res image (413KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 36. Distribution of the homogenized normal stress S11 and shear stress S13 from 10 to 12 s for the HSP when the wave height is 0.018 m with a period of 1.24 s.

In summary, the anisotropic stress distribution revealed in this section (where the panel dominates the normal stress and the core dominates the shear stress) is crucial for understanding the fluid structure coupling dynamics of the entire system. This inherent mechanical division of labor directly determines the dynamic response mode of the structure under wave action (Section 4.1), which in turn affects its macroscopic hydrodynamic characteristics (Section 4.2). Therefore, stress anisotropy is the core physical mechanism connecting component behavior, macroscopic structural dynamic response, and system hydrodynamic performance, providing a clear theoretical basis for optimizing structural performance.
4.4. Comparison with structures with lattice cores of different configurations
To demonstrate the efficacy of the continuum mechanics-based RVE framework in optimizing lattice core topologies, this study comparatively analyzes three core beam sections with identical relative densities and material properties: I-section, square (S-section), and circular (C-section) configurations (Fig. 37). Under consistent hydrodynamic loading (H = 0.018 m, T = 1.04 s), the RVE-derived equivalent models reveal significant performance divergences. The superior performance of the I-section structure (smaller vertical displacement and larger core shear force) (Fig. 38, Fig. 39) is derived from its optimized second-order area moment. This geometric advantage enables a 20–26 % increase in shear flow efficiency through enhanced web-flange stress coupling, thereby reducing deformation by 13–16 % (Table 10). The RVE methodology precisely resolves such microarchitectural influences on macroscopic responses, validating its unique ability to guide topology optimization for wave-loaded marine structures.
Fig. 37
Download: Download high-res image (339KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 37. S-section and C-section configurations of the PLSS cell.

Fig. 38
Download: Download high-res image (355KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 38. Comparison of the normalized vertical displacement of the three structures.

Fig. 39
Download: Download high-res image (214KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 39. Comparison of the homogenized shear stresses of the three structures.

Table 10. Comparison of the main performance metrics of the three structures.

Performance Metric	I-Section	S-Section	C-Section	Performance Gap (vs. I-Section)
Relative Density 
 (
55.5369	55.5369	55.5369	0 %
Specific Shear Stiffness 
 (
)	26734.9866	22541.7820	19126.0949	−15.68 %;
−28.46 %
Peak Normalized Vertical Displacement 
0.5312	0.5908	0.6201	11.32 %;
16.98 %
Peak Core Shear Stress S13(pa)	348.7742	277.1942	257.4681	−20.53 %;
−26.18 %
5. Conclusions
This study develops a novel coupled fluid‒structure interaction (FSI) framework that integrates computational fluid dynamics (CFD), representative volume element (RVE) homogenization, and dimensional scaling principles to analyze complex sandwich marine structures. The framework is fully validated and hydrodynamic calculations is performed on the pyramid lattice sandwich floating body.
Key findings include the following:
(1)
Equivalent Continuum Mechanics FSI Effectiveness: The framework successfully resolves hydroelastic responses of topologically complex sandwich floats while capturing nonlinear coupling effects.
(2)
Distinctive Sandwich Mechanics: Stress analysis reveals the following fundamental load-transfer mechanisms. face sheets sustain 98 % of the bending moments through membrane-normal stresses. Core shear dominance governs 78 % of the transverse load transfer in midspan regions. End regions exhibit hybrid stress states.
(3)
Wave Parameter Dependencies: Systematic parametric studies identify two mechanisms: strain rate-dominated deformation with low transmission and large reflection in the high-frequency domain. Inertia-driven rigid-body motions yield high transmission and low reflection in the low-frequency domain.
The main limitations of this study and future work are as follows:
(1)
The Stokes theory is applicable only to intermediate-depth and relatively regular waves. The working condition used in this study is a regular fifth-order Stokes wave, and the response of the structure under steep waves, breaking waves, and irregular waves has not been considered. Future work will address the scalability of the framework.
(2)
The plastic phase of the sandwich structures with complex topologically shaped cores is different from the elastic phase. The plastic evolution is characterized by complex coupling mechanisms and anisotropy, which poses a challenge for subsequent studies. Subsequent studies will focus on the damage response of sandwich structures under wave loading and extend the equivalent continuum mechanics two-way fluid‒structure coupling numerical method to the calculation of the complete structural elastic‒plastic cycle.