Abstract
The energy consumption of a structure is largely determined by the thermo-physical properties of its envelope. The thermal conductivity of the materials composing the envelopes is among the most important properties to be determined. However, this value has not been precisely defined in-situ for the straw material. Despite the fact that several studies have been conducted to quantify this value, yet disparate findings have been reported. For a more in-depth understanding of the thermal behavior of building components, experimental measurements are essential. Therefore, a protracted experimental campaign was carried out on a newly built structure in northern France under real weather and occupation conditions. Temperature, relative humidity and flux sensors were implanted through the wall and wheat straw bale thickness to understand hygrothermal behavior transfers and heat flow profiles changes along the whole monitored period. The instrumentation and data processing were compliant with the heat flow meter extended average method, a modified version of the ISO 9869-1 standardized approach. The experiment's results are satisfactory; when comparing the measured values using the extended average method with the theoretically calculated value, a good agreement was obtained, with a deviation of 4.66 %. The extended average method has proven to be an accurate and reliable in-situ measuring approach for determining the effective thermal conductivity of wheat straw bales at various temperatures and moisture levels.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Thermal performanceEffective thermal conductivityWheat straw insulationIn-situ hygrothermal measurementsHeat and mass transferReal-life circumstances
1. Introduction
The effects of climate change are being felt today, and future projections represent an unacceptably high and potentially catastrophic risk [1]. To avert any potentially catastrophic dangers that might threaten humanity in the coming years, world leaders came to a historic agreement at the UN Climate Change Conference (COP21) in Paris. The Paris Agreement states that in order to keep global temperature from increasing by more than 2 °C (and ideally less than 1.5 °C) beyond pre-industrial levels, immediate steps must be implemented to cut greenhouse gas emissions in all sectors [2]. The buildings and construction sector is by far the largest emitter of greenhouse gases, accounting for a staggering 37 % of global emissions, out of which a great percentage of emissions is from the use of cement and steel [3]. In addition, this sector is responsible for 34 % of global energy consumption. [4]. In Europe, 70 % of the energy used in residential building stocks in Europe is used for heating and cooling, making this the largest percentage of building energy consumption [5]. While it is possible to heat buildings efficiently using a variety of energy sources, the majority of commercial HVAC systems only employ mechanical power. However, a number of advancements in passive heating/cooling may be used to transfer the cooling burden to other methods [6].
To overcome these issues, the operating phase's contribution has been drastically reduced in recent buildings as low-, near- or zero-energy buildings [7]. Since 2020, all new buildings in the EU are required to be ‘nearly-zero energy buildings. Yet, this will be replaced by a further enhanced ‘zero-emission buildings’ requirement, starting from 2028 for new buildings owned by public bodies and 2030 for all other new buildings [4]. In the pursuit of operational energy efficiency in buildings, insulation materials are essential. They play a crucial role in regulating interior environmental conditions and lowering buildings' operating energy loads by decreasing heat loss in cold weather and heat gain in hot weather, thereby lowering the need for heating and cooling. Nevertheless, the highest percentage of insulation used currently are materials commonly derived from minerals and petrochemical substances. In Europe, for example, the most used insulation materials are glass wool, stone wool, expanded polystyrene (EPS), XPS, and PUR/PIR where they account for over 98 % of insulation materials used [8]. On top of that, these conventional insulation materials have high embodied energy values [9].
In order to comply with regulations and preserve the environment, a transition from conventional building materials toward sustainable and eco-friendly ought to occur more rapidly. Biomaterials provide an innovative approach to building materials by utilizing biological resources, waste, and agricultural by-products [10]. These materials arose as a viable way to transform the building industry, lessening its environmental influence while offering affordable alternatives [11].
These materials arose as a viable way to transform the building industry, lessening its environmental influence while offering innovative and affordable alternatives.
Each year, harvesting crops such as wheat, rice, barley, oats, corn, rye, and rape results in the production of a significant amount of one billion tons of waste. Straw bales are created by mechanically compacting the remaining stems or stalks into cubic shapes, which are then firmly secured with packing steel wires or polypropylene ropes [12,13]. As a thermal insulation material, straw bales can lessen the environmental impact during of materials production and building operation. During the production process, straw bales provide for substantial carbon storage in buildings, since carbon dioxide is sequestered during agricultural growth [14]. Sun et al. [15] in their paper, “Are straw bales better insulation materials for constructions?” has concluded that the employment of straw bales in construction successfully lowers operating energy consumption and contributes to minimize carbon emissions owing to their exceptional thermal performance. However, further research on the physical and environmental properties of such type material is crucial to improve their assessment and categorization, and consequent recommendation for broader adoption in sustainable construction practices [8].
Nowadays, the energy consumption of newly constructed buildings is estimated in the design phase. The use of new technologies such as Building Information Modelling (BIM), Building energy simulation (BES) allows for a much more efficient and easier calculation process for building services (heating/cooling) [16], provided that the models are appropriately calibrated with the actual parameters. Recently, Tlaiji et al. [17] stated that “to predict the building energy consumption, the thermal conductivity of the materials composing the envelopes must be precisely known”, which is not the case for the straw materials. Moreover, Sun et al. [15] in their review highlighted that using the calculation parameters to evaluate the dynamic thermal performance of straw bale walls has produced unacceptable results. Thus, it is crucial to reduce the gap between the designed and the real characteristics of straw bales used in constructions to deliver and reach energy consumption ambitions. The most recent review articles on bio-based materials have highlighted the paucity of work at the wall scale and indicated that more plant-based walls should have their hygrothermal responses studied experimentally under dynamic conditions [18,19].
The aim of this paper is to assess the applicability and reliability of an in-situ measuring method to determine the effective thermal conductivity of wheat straw bales used as insulation materials in real conditions. Firstly, an overview of heat transfer behavior in fibrous porous materials has been presented. Then a wide range of thermal conductivity values and correlations proposed by researchers, along with the methods used to get these values, have also been described. Inconvenience of each measuring technique has been presented, highlighting the uncertainty that may occur due to the coupled heat and moisture transfer on the defined values. Secondly, a thorough description of the standardized ISO 6946 [20] and ISO 9869-1 [21] approaches are presented. Along with an overview on the magnitude of the uncertainties and problems confronted when utilizing the average method to measure the in-situ thermal resistance. Additionally, an extended notion of the average method has been proposed [22], involving modifications in instrumentations and adjustments to the data interpretation technique. Thirdly, the experimental campaign, which lasted for more than three years, is documented, including the wall configuration and the studied material (type, orientation, and density), instrumentation and monitoring settings. Finally, a thorough analysis of the experimental data has been conducted, followed by a discussion to evaluate the obtained values to determine the viability of the used strategy.
2. Literature review
2.1. Thermal conductivity
The ISO standard and the ASHRAE manual [23], both states that the thermal conductivity is taken as a constant value tested based on fixed environmental conditions. According to ISO 10456 standard [24], a laboratory test should be performed on a non-stressed material at a temperature of 10 °C or 23 °C, dry, or with 50 % relative humidity. The thermal conductivity measured on such conditions is usually referred as the declared thermal conductivity and is used by industrials as value of an insulation product as it leaves the factory. For instance, the French straw construction network (RFCP) [25] provides a declared thermal conductivity of 0.048 W/(m⋅K) for wheat straw having densities between 80 and 120 kg/m3 and fibers oriented perpendicularly to heat flow value. However, such calculations imply that variations in thermal conductivity caused by climatic variations are not taken into account. In fact, indoor and outdoor air temperature and humidity change dynamically [26] and materials used for building insulation can be subjected to temperatures between 0 °C and 50 °C and relative humidity levels between 30 % RH and 95 % RH under normal operating conditions [27]. So, due to the fact that thermal conductivity fluctuates with temperature and moisture content, the estimated and real values may differ [[28], [29], [30]]. To overcome this issue, researchers have started to propose different approaches to provide realistic values. For instance, Pérez-Bella et al. [31] developed a simplified thermal conductivity correction factor (CCF) that considers variations in external environmental conditions for each Spanish provincial capital. A CCF can be multiplied to the declared thermal conductivity from ISO 10456 to estimate the realistic thermal conductivity of a building material relating to the construction location.
Nevertheless, the phenomena of heat transfer in porous materials is more complicated than in homogeneous solids [32]. Furthermore, the majority of mass-type thermal insulation materials have a solid matrix filled of tiny gaps that make up 90 % or more of the total volume, making them highly porous [33]. At the microscopic level, the thermal conductivity depends on the media's microstructural features such as cell size, diameter and arrangement of fibers or particles, transparency to thermal radiation, type and pressure of the gas, bonding materials, tortuosity etc. [34]. At this scale, the fractal geometry theory is widely used to measure more accurately the thermal conductivity especially when traditional models fail to capture the non-linear behavior of these systems [35,36]. The dominant heat transfer modes are described as follow: radiation, convection, gas conduction, and solid conduction [37]. Whereas at the macroscopic scale, Hung Anh and Pásztory [38] in their review on factors influencing the thermal conductivity of building insulation materials, found that the most prevalent factors are bulk density, temperature differential, and moisture content, with a few minor ones like aging.
Thus, the complexity of the heat transfer behavior in porous materials is described with the term apparent (or effective) thermal conductivity [39]. Which indicates the real value that ought to be taken into account based on the circumstances in which the material is tested.
Straw bales, are classified as fibrous porous hygroscopic materials with multi-layer structure [40,41]. And, it is evident from the aforementioned information that it is not possible to assign the declared or a constant value to straw thermal conductivity.
Recently, Tlaiji et al. [17] investigated the microstructure (the size, distribution, and morphology) of straw fibers in order to develop a mathematical model. They have reached to prove by calculating the Nusselt number Nu for straw pores that the convection inside straw materials be neglected and determined the effective thermal conductivity of straw bales using equation (1):
(1)
Where 
 represents the effective thermal conductivity, 
 represents the matrix conduction (solid and gas) and 
 represents the radiation.
On the other hand, since the 90's and up to present numerous researches have been conducted to investigate the factors influencing the thermal conductivity at the macroscopic scale. The results have shown that there are five key elements that influence straw thermal conductivity such as density, fiber (stem) orientation, type of straw (microstructural and chemical composition), environmental condition (moisture content and temperature) and age [15]. Along with several thermal conductivity values ranging from 0.03 W/(m⋅K) [42] to 0.189 W/(m⋅K) [43]. To summarize these studies, Table 1 displays the result and variables taken into consideration during characterization campaigns until present. Moreover, many of these researchers have developed different propositions of thermal conductivity correlations for determining thermal conductivity. For instance, Douzane et al. [44] in their study, generated a linear correlation between the mean temperature ranging from 10 °C to 40 °C and the thermal conductivity of wheat straw thermal as follow:
(2)
Where 
 represents the dry thermal conductivity at a given temperature, T represents the mean temperature, 
 represents the thermal conductivity of the solid at 0 °C, and 
 represents an experimental intrinsic property of the material.
Table 1. Thermal conductivity of straw bales provided in literature by researchers; (−) non identified.

Year	Authors	Straw type	Density (kg/m3)	Mean temperature (°C)	Moisture content MC/Relative humidity RH (%)	Fiber orientation	Thermal conductivity (W/(m⋅K))
1993	McCabe [42]	Wheat	133	20	MC 8.4 %	Perpendicular	0.048
Rice	123	Parallel	0.061
1997	CEC/ATI [45]	Rice	107	23	MC 11 %	Perpendicular	0.0811
Parallel	0.1471
1998	Christian et al. [46]	–	81	–	–	Perpendicular	0.057
–	62	Parallel	0.082
2001	Andersen et al. [47]	–	76	10	0	Perpendicular	0.52
Parallel	0.57
2003	Ashour [48]	Barley	69–98	10–32	–	–	0.03–0.094
Wheat	82–138	10–34	–	–	0.03–0.099
2004	Beck et al. [49]	Barley		40		Perpendicular	
2005	Goodhew and Griffiths [50]	–	60	–	–	–	0.067
2012	Vèjeliené et al. [51]	Barley	50–120	10	RH 50 %	Perpendicular	0.04–0.075
60–120	Parallel	0.0845–0.875
Barley chopped	35–80	Random	0.039–0.045
Barley defibered	35–80	Random	0.037–0.044
2012	Shea et al. [52]	Wheat	63–123	10–30	RH 50 %	Random	0.059–0.64
2015	Wei et al. [53]	Rice	200–350	30	MC 10–18 %	–	0.051–0.053
2015	Volf et al. [54]	–	98	–	–	–	0.065
2016	Conti et al. [55]	Triticosecale	65.7	19	MC 12,5 %	–	0.062–0.07
84.1	MC 11,5 %
2016	Douzane et al. [44]	Wheat	80	10–40	0	Perpendicular	0.05–0.063
Parallel	0.072–0.088
2016	Reif et al. [56]	Wheat	95–120	23 °C	0	–	0.045–0.046
RH 50 %	0.047–0.05
RH 80 %	0.057–0.059
2017	Costes et al. [57]		68–123	10	RH 50 %	–	0.061–0.079
2017	D'Alessandro et al. [58]	–	80	22	RH 45 %	Random	0.051
2019	Cascone et al. [59]	Wheat	78	20–35	MC 8 %	Random	0.056–0.058
2019	Marques et al. [60]	Rice	80–100	10	0	–	0.039
RH 50 %	0.041–0.042
RH 80 %	0.045–0.048
2019	Sabapathy et al. [43]	Rice	68	30	0	Perpendicular	0.057
Parallel	0.08
Random	0.049
RH 40 %	Perpendicular	0.059
Parallel	0.134
Random	0.06
RH 60 %	Perpendicular	0.078
Parallel	0.165
Random	0.075
RH 80 %	Perpendicular	0.084
Parallel	0.182
Random	0.07
2020	Cornaro et al. [61]	–	106	–	–	Perpendicular	0.066
2021	Mehravar et al. [62]	Wheat	61	10	–	–	0.047
2023	Tlaiji et al. [17]	Wheat	80	15–55	RH 15–95 %	Perpendicular
Parallel	0.048–0.066
0.054–0.95
100	Perpendicular
Parallel	0.052–0.74
0.053–0.93
120	Perpendicular
Parallel	0.06–0.90
0.056–0.12
For parallel oriented straw bales: 
 equals to 0.067W/(m⋅K) with 
 equaling to 0.0078W/(m⋅K2).
For perpendicular orientated straw bales: 
 equals to 0.046W/(m⋅K) with 
 equaling 0.009W/(m⋅K2).
Also Sabapath et al. [43] proposed polynomial thermal conductivity correlations (with 
 the density, T the temperature, and RH the relative humidity) for parallel and random/perpendicular oriented rice straw in mW/(m⋅K) respectively:
(3)
(4)
These values were determined using two categories of laboratory measurement methods: transient methods and steady-state methods. The transient methods, such as (wire, strip or plane) [63]; thermal profile (pulse or step) of heat source [17,43,64]; thermal probe [50], are well-known for their rapidity and reduced susceptibility to moisture transfer. Yet, despite their advantages, these techniques are unreliable for evaluating highly insulating materials [65], low density and anisotropic materials [39]. They are only useful for internal comparative analysis factors, such as density, but it is not advised to compare the results with data from the literature [66]. Whereas, steady-state methods are characterized by their accuracy. Guarded Hot Plate (GHP) [44,51,[56], [57], [58],60]; Heat Flow Meter (HFM) [52,53,59,62]; hot box apparatus [46,55,61], are characterized by their accuracy applicability to a broader range of materials. However, while testing moist materials, extra care should be used since the estimated thermal conductivity may vary if the tests are stopped prematurely. Recently, researchers have been interested on studying the impact of the coupled heat and moisture transfers on the measurement accuracy of the thermal conductivity by the HFM method [27,67,68]. They highlighted that a special attention must be taken regarding attaining steady state and ensure that hygrothermal equilibrium is reached in hygroscopic domain.
According to the ISO 10051 Standard [69] the moisture effects on heat transfer have been analyzed using a steady state measuring apparatus and the test period has been divided into 3 phases as shown in Fig. 1. The meticulously sealed test sample exhibits a consistent moisture distribution during the first Phase A. Since the heated side is gradually drying out, this phase is followed by the transition phase B when the heat flow drops until Phase C, when a dynamic moisture equilibrium is attained. The standard recommends phase A as evaluation range for materials with low vapor permeability and phase C for all other materials [70]. Alongside, the European standards EN 12664 [71] and EN 12667 [72] presents criterion that enable a precise evaluation of the thermal conductivity by guarded hot plate and heat flux meter (HFM) techniques for insulation materials in both dry and wet conditions. However, if the characterization conditions are not respected the measurement will fall in Phase B, and the resultant value will be inaccurate due to moisture movement.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (421KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Evolution of the measured heat flux during thermal transmissivity tests of moist materials according to ISO 10051 [69], in addition to schemes representing phase B and C for a heat flow meter test.

This phenomenon is known as interstitial pressure, which is force that the fluid (liquid or gas) exerts between cells and capillaries in bodily tissues to maintaining moisture equilibrium. When moisture migrates in hygroscopic structures energy is released through latent heat phenomena. In fact, the latent heat of moisture 
 is the sum of the latent heat of vaporization of water 
 and the differential heat of sorption 
, described by the following equation (5):
(5)
When no phase change is occurring (condensation/evaporation) the latent heat of evaporation 
 will be equal to 0 and the latent heat of moisture will be equal to the differential heat of sorption. Thus, the heat generated from mass migration will be added to the heat transfer due to temperature difference. As a result, the effective thermal conductivity isn't equal to the Fourier's thermal conductivity only. Instead, equation (6) governs with 
 representing the effective thermal conductivity, 
 represents the thermal conductivity defined by Fourier's law and 
 represents the diffusive thermal conductivity related to the thermal flow due to moisture diffusion.
(6)
This process is also translated in the mathematical models that describes hygrothermal transfer in porous materials such as Künzel equations [73]. For instance, El Assaad et al. [27] in their first study used a Heat Flow Meter device to measure the thermal conductivity of moisten wood fiber insulation. Their experiments involved two stages to reach equilibrium: a “rough” stage with 1 % variance in thermal conductivity for 10 consecutive readings, and a “fine” stage with 0.2 % variation for 10 consecutive readings as recommended by the manufacturer. Simultaneously, in order to support their experimental findings, they generated a simulation on COMSOL according to Künzel model. They realized that the measured value does not correspond to the simulated one. Therefore, further investigations were carried out to obtain more accurate numbers, and they discovered that the equilibrium wasn't attained until there was a 0.1 % change for 100 consecutive readings in the second stage. Also, Florez et al. [68] conducted experimental and numerical investigations on measuring thermal conductivity of moist bio-based materials. They stated that the system may take a very long time to attain hygrothermal equilibrium, and this period increases with the thickness and density of the material. In their most recent study, El Assaad et al. [67] tested a larger range of insulation materials while referring to their equilibrium criteria using the same apparatus. They concluded that stopping the HFM test too soon results in significant errors (10–40 % at high moisture contents) and a different shape for the moisture dependency of thermal conductivity. This explains the inconsistent results for the heat conductivity of damp building insulation materials seen before.
2.2. Wall scale measuring methods
2.2.1. Calculated theoretical method
The ISO 6946 standard [20] provides a simple computation method to calculate the theoretical thermal resistance (Rth) without any physical examination. As long as the stratigraphy and the nature of the materials studied are well known. Otherwise, a destructive technique like the endoscope method is used to measure the thickness of the wall's layers [74]. Also, it is frequently used in conjunction with samples extraction to examine the material's properties for the subsequent computation of thermal resistance (conductivity), according to ISO 6946:2007. Where, the RTot/Th is defined using the following equation (7):
(7)
Where 
 (W/m2K) is the thermal resistance of each layer and is calculated by dividing the thickness of the layer di (m) and the thermal conductivity of its material λi (W/(m K)). Regarding, 
 and 
 ((m2 K)/W) they represent the thermal resistances of the inner and outer surfaces, respectively. These values are suggested by the standard based on previous studies on the internal and external heat transfer coefficients 
 of 7.69(W/(m2K)) and 
 of 24(W/(m2K)), obtained under precise boundary conditions, in terms of convection and radiation. Yet, if in particular cases an advanced investigation is required, the Annex-A of the ISO 6946 offers a detailed procedure to compute internal and external heat transfer coefficients.
However, there may be a high degree of uncertainty generated by the application of this method. Evangelisti et al. [75] stated that the thermo-physical characteristics of materials, particularly their thermal conductivities, are frequently misidentified. In fact many author highlighted unacceptable uncertainties in their results ranging from 5 % to 50 % due to unprecise theoretical thermal conductivities [76,77].
Consequently, in the following sections, it is important to choose the right thermal conductivity at which the measured in-situ values are compared.
2.2.2. In-situ measuring method
HFM is a standardized, non-destructive and steady-state method adapted to determine various thermal properties of building components. Its use and effectiveness rely on creating a minimum temperature gradient between the internal and external faces of the studied component, to guarantee the presence of a sufficient heat flow. This method is more effective on planar building component, with opaque layers and are perpendicular to the heat flow while having no significant lateral heat flow. The standard ISO 9869-1 [21] proposes two methods for data analysis: the dynamic approach and the average progressive method.
The average method is a straightforward approach and frequently employed to define the in situ thermal resistance, conductance or transmittance.
The premise of this method comprises the acquisition of the heat flux through the studied component by the HFM installed on the element's face adjacent to the more stable temperature, primarily the interior face, as well as the acquisition of the (air or surface) temperatures on both sides of the component under steady conditions. Following that, the result is obtained by dividing the mean temperature difference by the mean density of heat flow rate, the average calculated over a sufficient amount of time. The thermal resistance (
), conductance (
Ʌ
) and transmittance (
) are estimated using (8), (9), (10) respectively:
(8)
(9)
Ʌ
(10)
where 
 is the heat flow rate density per unit area, 
 is the interior surface temperature of the building element; 
 is the exterior surfaces temperature of the building element, environmental temperature; 
 is the interior environmental temperature; 
 is the exterior environmental temperature and the index 
 enumerates the individual measurements.
When the estimate is computed after each measurement and for a sufficiently period of time. The value tends to converge to an asymptote assumed the real value if standard criteria are met. For instance, the element's heat content remains constant between the beginning and the end of the measurement (identical temperatures and moisture distributions).
Furthermore, for elements having a specific heat per unit area of more than 20 kJ/(m2. K), the analysis shall be carried out over a period which is an integer multiple of 24 h. Only when the following requirements are met, the test could be ended.
1
The test lasts longer than 72 h (3days);
2
The R-value obtained at the end of the test does not deviate by more than ± 5 % from the value obtained 24 h prior by more than ± 5 %;
3
There is no deviation of more than ± 5 % between the R-value derived from the data of the final time period of the same duration and the values derived from the data of the first time period during INT (2 x DT/3) days of the measurement period. Where DT is the test's duration in days; INT is the integer part;
4
One of the techniques outlined in the standard should be applied if the change in heat stored in the wall exceeds 5 % of the heat flowing through the wall during the test period.
In addition to that, if temperature isn't stable around the heat flow meter the standard recommended a longer period of measurement even more than 7 days. The main challenge of this standardized method is that the length of the testing time and the measuring conditions affect how accurately the value is measured.
Beyond that, this method is unreliable in low temperature gradients and the optimum measuring circumstances are high temperature difference with low temperature variations [78]. As previously stated, the standard indicates a mandatory minimum temperature gradient between the internal and external faces of the studied component; however, it did not specify the threshold at which accurate measurements could be made. Consequently, through the years academics have been assessing the marginal temperature difference. H. Trethowen [79] highlighted that when employed the HFM, the temperature difference should be higher than 10 °C. Albatici and Tonelli [80] in their on site evaluation of U-value stated that good final result are obtained with a minimum difference between inside and outside temperature of 10–15 °C. Asdrubali et al. [81] and Li et al. [82] discovered that the measurement uncertainty was decreased when the temperature differential between the interior and outdoor ambient was greater than 10 °C and the internal surface temperature was maintained as constant as possible. Tadeu et al. [83] emphasized that precise measurements might not be possible with a temperature differential between the inside and outside environments of less than 10 °C. Also, Ficco et al. [76] deduced from in-situ U-value measurement that a △T < 10 °C lead to unacceptable uncertainties. On the other hand, Cesaratto et al. and Cesaratto and Carli [84,85] reported, that the increase in the temperature difference measurement can reduce measurement error and lessen the impact of temperature fluctuations. Likewise, Desogus et al. [86] conducted a comparative analysis on the in-situ measured and theoretical U-values. And according to their findings, the measurement uncertainty was 10 %, with a temperature difference of 10 °C between the outer-inner surfaces, and the greater the temperature difference, the higher the measurement accuracy. Yet, prior to Gaspar et al. [87] the correlation between the temperature gradient and the time required to measure building components with low thermal transmittance (high thermal resistance) has not been thoroughly examined in any of the previous investigations. Through an experimental campaign, they demonstrated that higher temperature differences than 19 °C necessitated a 72-h test length, whereas lower temperature differences required a longer test duration.
On top of that, it should be noted that besides temperature gradient and measuring duration a number of factors and sources of error could interfere to distort and alter the results. These factors can generally be grouped into one of three categories: site, building, and operating conditions [80]. Teni et al. [77] reviewed and contrasted the existing experimental methods for in-situ measurements. They came to the conclusion that a number of variables, including moisture content, temperature fluctuations, test duration, etc., might affect and alter the results of the experiment.
In the literature, authors evaluated their work by comparing the resultant value to the theoretical value calculated using ISO 6946 [20]. This deviation between the results obtained with HFM method and theoretical value is calculated as absolute value using the following equation (11):
(11)
According to the ISO 9869–1:2014 standard [21], the uncertainty of in-situ measurements obtained by the HFM average method ranges from 14 % to 28 %. Nonetheless, throughout the years, the degree of divergence has been fluctuating more and more amongst researchers. Some of them have recently conducted comparative studies and compiled review tables that demonstrate the amplitude of differences between theoretical and experimental values, which range from 1 % to 264 % [77,88]. The highest divergence was mostly obtained in cases where a layer of insulating material was present [76,89]. Scientists who studied straw constructions, also referred in majority to the average method to measure in-situ thermal resistance and transmittance. Gallegos-Ortega et al. [90] tested a wheat straw structure in a dry summer, subtropical, mediterranean environment using the standard practice ASTM C1155-95 [91] summation method (similar to the average method). He discovered a value higher than those suggested in earlier investigations. Furthermore, recent review on straw bales [15] demonstrated, that there is notable discrepancy between the measured and calculated data. This underscores that the present dynamic thermal performance evaluation approach is inadequate for accurately evaluating straw bale walls.
According to the above throughout research, one can be easily be convinced that the approach applied to identify in-situ thermal characteristics of building components referring to the HFM average method depend on many variables and in many cases, results can be catastrophic non related in any kind to the reality. And, the reliability on this method as prescribed in the standard cannot always meet the expectation of the researcher. However, the ISO 9869–1 standard reveals the awareness of this inaccuracy between the measured values and the theoretical ones. It adds that if the percentage is higher than 20 % even if the conditions of the standard were respected. One or more factors just listed, in addition to the wrong comparison to the thermal conductivity of the material, as detailed in the previous section; combined could be behind this discrepancy. Thus, the average method provides a simple approach, misleading outcomes may occur. Hence, the effectiveness of this measurement technique is linked to the controllability of the sources generating the significant amount of gap between the values. But, in real life some conditions are uncontrollable. Therefore, an increasing number of academics have focused on enhancing the efficiency of the standardized average method with duly considering the above key issues.
2.2.3. Extended average method
Researchers have been working to address the accuracy problem and the significant discrepancy between the in-situ values HFM measured according to the average method and laboratory-characterized values. Efforts have been put to keep the simplicity without the need of sophisticated mathematical models or heavy equipment (e.g., hotbox), while obtaining more accurate results. A number of scientists [22,[92], [93], [94]] proposed to install an additional heat flux meter on the opposite side of the one recommended by ISO 9869-1 and even more in the case of having a multilayer highly insulated structure [95,96]. So far, this technique has been known as for extended average method and dual/double-side (D-HFM) method. The origin of this idea was inspired from the ISO 8301 [97], utilized for determining insulating materials' thermal resistance under standardized conditions as shown previously in section 2.1. The aim behind this addition was to incorporate concepts from the ISO 8301 measuring the heat flux on the inner and outer faces of the desired material. Then, adapt them to the conditions imposed by the ISO 9869-1 to approximately depict a steady-state scenario in real-world situations. Thus, by implementing this approach, the researchers were able to ascertain the thermophysical properties of each component within the wall. Rasooli and Itard [22] investigated the effects of installing an additional heat flux sensor opposed to the one that is recommended by ISO 9869-1. They discovered that by applying equation (12) of the modified approach helped them in getting the in-situ thermal resistance more quickly and accurately, with an error in terms of deviation from the theoretical value of less than 10 %.
(12)
Where 
 and 
 are the thermal resistances obtained based on cumulative heat flux at the interior and exterior surface, respectively. While 
 represents the thermal resistance obtained from the extended average method.
2.3. Summary
Several factors contribute to the variation in thermal conductivity values reported for straw bales. Straw type has minimal impact, while wheat straw has lower thermal conductivity than rice and barley, respectively. More important the stem orientation, perpendicular or random orientation create more closed air chambers, which lessen heat transfer. Furthermore, Thermal conductivity is influenced nonlinearly by density; lower-density bales facilitate airflow, thus increasing heat transfer. In contrast, increased density reduces air spaces and decreases heat transfer, until extreme compression increases solid contact and increases it again. Relative humidity (RH) and temperature both increase thermal conductivity, although RH's influence is greater than temperatures. When moisture passes through the stems' holes and forces out the closed-air spaces, the thermal conductivity of straw bales increases. Finally, different measuring methods might provide erroneous lab-scale findings, particularly when working with damp materials or under strong temperature gradients. Therefore, it has recently become common to consider a temperature difference across the sample below 10 K to reduce the impact of moisture migration on the thermal conductivity measurement [19].This emphasizes the importance of carefully interpreting data when comparing research.
As for in-situ methods, the standardized average method was introduced in order to address the significant deviations observed by researchers when applied on different materials and wall composition in particular straw bale walls. The extended average method, on the other hand, was presented to demonstrate how satisfactory results may be achieved by using it instead of the latter one. Yet, this technique has never been tested on straw bales, raising doubts about its effectiveness. Therefore, the following sections describe a protracted experimental campaign that incorporates the extended average approach to evaluate its efficacy in measuring the thermal conductivity of straw bale alone, rather than the entire wall.
3. Experimental setup
3.1. Wall configuration and material nature
The experimental campaign was conducted on a single-story building wall, located in the Caps and Marais d'Opale Regional Natural Park in northern France as illustrated in Fig. 2. The focus was emphasized on the in-service hygrothermal behavior of the straw bales present in the wall. Specifically, wheat straw bales of 0.36 m (thickness) × 0.46 m × 1.0 m with a density of 80kg/m3 and stems perpendicularly oriented to heat flow. The bales were sourced from the local region. All bales were produced with the same size and density. They were manufactured using a baler equipped with a piston compression mechanism, a double twine tying device, and an adjustable chamber pressure system. The straw was used in its natural state after being harvested without the use of adhesives or further processing. The bales were reserved beneath shelters in order to maintain their durability, their moisture content did not exceed 14 %.
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (549KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. On site building photo and tested wall composition [98].

3.2. Instrumentation
The instrumentation phase in the in-situ experimental campaign is one of the most crucial stages of the study. Inaccurate readings might result from improper handling and installation of measuring. Therefore, to minimize any potential source of error that may contribute to the discrepancy between estimated and observed in situ values, the measuring apparatus were carefully chosen. All sensors were laboratory calibrated prior to installation, enabling accurate and repeatable measurements over their specified operating range. Table 2 and Fig. 3 present the detailed technical specifications of the measuring apparatus. First, appropriate locations have been chosen to install the sensors on the insulation. Two 15 × 15 cm heat flow meters (HFMs) and thermocouples type-T were placed at thermally homogenous locations avoiding thermal bridges and zones affected by physical or geometric anomalies. The heat flux meter measures the rate of heat transfer per unit area through the straw bale. It is made of a thermopile sensor composed of several thermocouples embedded within the thin plate. The temperature gradient across the sensor generates a voltage. Each heat flux meter has a fixed sensitivity (s) expressed in μV/(W/m2), determined during calibration. This sensitivity converts the output voltage to the associated heat flux.
Table 2. Detailed specifications of instrumented apparatus.

Instrument	Type of Apparatus	Range	Accuracy
Heat flux meter	HFM, Captec company, France	±2000 W/m2	±5 %
Temperature sensor	T-Type TC, TC S.A.S Inc., France	−200 ∼ +350 °C	±0.1 °C
Temperature and humidity probe	HMP 60, Vaisala Inc., Finland	−40 ∼ +60 °C
0∼100 %RH	±0.5 °C
±3 %RH
Data logger	DataTaker DT80W, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA	20–50,000 mV	±0.1 % of reading
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (139KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. From left to right: Heat flux meter; Temperature and humidity probe; Thermocouple (temperature sensor).

To ensure a thermally uniform area, a qualitative assessment was made with an infrared thermographic camera FLIR B360, in accordance with the ISO 6781 [99]. Meng, Yan et al. [100] explored that when the thermocouples and heat flow meters were improperly pasted the measurement error can be up to 6 % and 26 % respectively. Then, to ensure an adequate thermal contact between the whole surface of the sensor and the bale and to prevent contact resistances, a thin layer of thermal interface material (silicon grease) was meticulously applied. Additionally, five temperature and humidity probes were positioned at various locations inside the straw bale to track temperature and relative humidity variations through its depth, as shown in Fig. 4. Also, interior and exterior climate conditions were recorded using HMP temperature and humidity sensors. Finally, the sensors were connected to a data logger which was fastened on the inner side of the instrumented wall. A clear representation of the used apparatus is well illustrated in Fig. 5.
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (880KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Left: HFM placement on the inner face of the straw bale. Right: Probes placement in the straw bale.

Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (626KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Sketch of the sensor location set on the tested wall.

3.3. Monitoring conditions and data collection
The experimental campaign was conducted under real weather and occupation conditions. A continuous monitoring was held throughout the construction phase and lasted for 41 months; from July 21, 2020 to November 24, 2023. According to ISO Standard 9869-1, a sample frequency should be between 30 and 60 min [21]. However, the data recorder collected data every 5 min to provide more precise values. In addition, indoor and outdoor air temperature and relative humidity were continuously monitored, enabling the detection of any abnormal behavior in the system. The data logger has been calibrated to record temperature and relative humidity fluctuation directly in (°C) and (%RH). Heat flux kinetics, are recorded as a voltage in mV. Given the fixed sensitivity of the device, the applied heat flux is calculated by directly dividing the recorded voltage by the calibrated sensitivity value of the sensor as shown in equation (13).
(13)
Where 
 is the heat flux (W/m2); 
 is the recorded voltage (mV) and S is the calibrated fixed sensitivity (μV/(W/m2)).
4. Results and discussion
4.1. Recorded data
To prevent any errors in data processing, the experimental results were thoroughly evaluated. Based on the acquisition conditions mentioned in the ISO 9869-1 and recommendations previously proposed by researchers, a sorting criterion has been implemented to identify periods that will be used for in-situ estimations. Therefore, in the first place only, data relating to an inner-outer temperature differential of more than 10 °C that lasts for at least 72 h (3 days) uninterrupted is taken into consideration throughout the filtering procedure. Then, Rudtsch [101] emphasized that samples with the same overall moisture content but different distributions in thickness can give different mean thermal conductivity values. The distribution of the sensors at different positions allowed the measurement of the material's hygrothermal behavior under actual conditions at each point. Thus, accurate calculation of the mean temperature and relative humidity to limit errors in the analysis. The measurements taken during each of the four periods that met the requirements for data processing is displayed in Table 3. It is obvious that the periods occurred during winter seasons, when there is typically a significant temperature differential between indoors and outdoors.
Table 3. Periods that satisfied the data processing criteria.

Period	Days	Duration (h)	Average temperature gradient between the straw faces (°C)	Straw bale mean temperature (°C)	Straw bale mean relative humidity (%HR)
Period 1	From 21/01/2021 to 27/01/2021	118	13	10.2	67.7
Period 2	From 29/11/2022 to 19/12/2022	476	17.5	11.8	55.4
Period 3	From 22/01/2023 to 26/01/2023	80	15	10.7	55.5
Period 4	From 07/11/2023 to 11/11/2023	81	12.1	15.5	56.5
While analyzing temperature and relative humidity kinetics at the core and the element interfaces, the vapor pressure (Pv) has been calculated using equation (14) [73]. The profile of these values has been plotted throughout the four periods in function of time, as shown in Fig. 6, Fig. 7. Consequently, the system's coupled heat and mass transfer was comprehended and it enabled the determination of the appropriate in-situ readings that would be used in the next part to compare the theoretical and experimental results.
(14)
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (898KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Temperature, relative humidity and vapor pressure profiles during period 1(left), period 2(right).

4.2. Thermal conductivity values assessment
The main objective of the equipment setup was to determine the effective thermal conductivity of the straw bale. Since, the fluxmeters where only tracking the transfer through one enclosed element. The interior and exterior transfer through convection is negligible. Furthermore, given that the thickness of the measured straw bale is known, the effective thermal conductivity is obtained from dividing the straw thickness by the thermal resistance.
The effective thermal conductivity of strawbales has been thoroughly explained and detailed previously in section 2.1. The measured values and correlations achieved till present have been presented. However, neither of previously mentioned correlations describes the real behavior of the material investigated case. Since, some describes the characteristics of different species of straw bales, while others were determined by inaccurate techniques of measurement. Nevertheless, for example equation (2) developed by Douzane et al. [44] defines the effective thermal conductivity having the same properties (density, fiber orientation, dimensions, specie). However, the correlation was derived for a dry material. And as proved and cited previously, straw bale thermal conductivity is dependent also on its moisture content. Thus, this correlation alone cannot translate in-situ moisten material thermal conductivity measure. Meanwhile, the majority of sophisticated hygrothermal models (WUFI, DELPHIN, MOIST etc.), takes into consideration the dependence on moisture content thermal conductivity. WUFI [102] for example, use a linear relationship that describes the dependency of the thermal conductivity on the moisture content proposed by Künzel [73] as shows in equation (15).
(15)
Where, 
 [kg/m3] represents the moisture content of the material, 
 [W/(m.K)] being the thermal conductivity of the material containing moisture 
, 
 [W/(m.K)] being the thermal conductivity of the dry material, 
 [kg/m3] standing for the bulk density of the dry material and 
 [−] being a coefficient that is used to account for the increase of a material's thermal conductivity due to its moisture content. For the material studied in this work the value of 
 is considered to be equal to 4. So far, this equation has been used to determine the heat conductivity moisture-dependent in building materials. Using the previously mentioned function, Kontoleon and Giarma [103] examined the dynamic thermal response of a number of clay bricks and concrete samples with varying compositions in relation to their moisture content. Moreover, WUFI have proven its efficacity in generating hygrothermal simulations for different building materials under real weather scenarios. Recently, researchers whom interest was focused on determining the hygrothermal behavior of straw fibers materials in construction, found good concordance between WUFI simulated results and experimental readings [104,105]. So, the effective thermal conductivity at a given temperature and moisture content could be estimated, by the integrating the resultant value from equation (2) at a given temperature into equation (15). Yet, the measured hygric measurements in-situ are relative humidity values. According to Lawrence et al. [106], the moisture content of wheat straw bales could be defined in function of its relative humidity through the following equation (16):
(16)
Where, 
 represents the moisture content at relative humidity 
, 
 being the fiber saturation moisture content (400 %), 
 the relative humidity, 
 = 44, 
 = 0.9773 and 
ⅈ
 = 1.6. It should be noted that the values of 
, 
 and 
ⅈ
 were defined experimentally in previous studies by Hedlin [107]. This equation was adopted and implemented in several studies and generated satisfactory results [44,45,58,60,108]. On the other hand, in order to validate the combability of equations (2), (15), (16) to the investigated element. The authors of this article in their previous works have validated a numerical model on WUFI 2D studying the hygrothermal behavior of the same wall. The model was calibrated by assigning the same onsite conditions and using the mentioned equations that describes the material behavior. A regression analysis was performed through the computation of the root mean square error (RMSE) and the coefficient of determination (R2). The model's precision was astounding having an R2 of 0.97 and 0.92 for temperature and relative humidity respectively, at any given position [109].
Accordingly, the effective theoretical thermal conductivity was calculated for each period using equations (2), (15), (16) combined filled with the mean temperature and relative humidity cited in Table 3.
Then, referring to the average method, two thermal conductivities values were defined 
 and 
. First, using equation (8), the thermal resistances were calculated by applying the entering and leaving heat fluxes measured from equation (13) by HFM installed on the inner and outer straw faces respectively. Second, each thermal conductivity value was derived by dividing the straw bale thickness (0.36m) by the corresponding thermal resistance.
Similarly, the average thermal conductivity 
 was determined by following the same process but by referring to the extended average method was used instead of the average method, thus using equation (12) in the first step.
Fig. 8 shows the plotted profiles of the thermal conductivities for the four periods in function of time. In parallel, a comparative assessment has been conducted to compute the deviation percentage between the measured and the theoretically calculated values according to the ISO 6946 using equation (11). Table 4 shows the theoretical and the experimentally (HFM methods) measured thermal conductivities as well as the percentage deviation between them.
Table 4. Theoretical thermal conductivity and experimentally (HFM methods) measured thermal conductivities as well as the percentage deviation between them.

Period	Duration (h)	Theoretical thermal conductivity from ISO 6946
Using equation (2)(15)(16)	Thermal conductivity from HFM (interior surface) [W/(m.K)] -Deviation [%]	Thermal conductivity from HFM (exterior surface) [W/(m.K)] -Deviation [%]	Thermal conductivity from the extended HFM average method [W/(m.K)] -Deviation [%]
Period 1	118	0.084	0.119–41.37 %	0.061–27.01 %	0.090–7.18 %
Period 2	476	0.077	0.10–30.37 %	0.061–21.04 %	0.080–4.66 %
Period 3	80	0.076	0.10–35.70 %	0.063–17.08 %	0.083–9.31 %
Period 4	81	0.080	0.10–29.29 %	0.072–10.11 %	0.087–9.58 %
4.3. Discussion
To begin, a comparison between the computed thermal conductivity and the standardized measured value by the HFM interior surface was conducted in order to assess accuracy, as indicated in Table 4. A significant difference ranging from 29.29 % to 41.37 % was visualized. Then, when comparing the calculated thermal conductivity to the measured value by the (HFM exterior surface), the difference ranged from 10.11 % to 27.01 %. Despite the fact, that in both approaches the values fulfilled the convergence conditions, the values were unrelated to reality. The wide discrepancy between theoretically calculated and measured values was not unpredictable, since many scientists have already demonstrated even higher values of uncertainty. In this case, there are two potential causes of this discrepancy. First, as stated in the ISO 9869-1 standard: “There are phase changes such as freezing, thawing, condensation or evaporation of water or moisture” [21]. Charisi et al. [110] examined the hygrothermal behavior of hygroscopic materials under different moisture levels and discovered that the quantity of vapor adsorbed was the main reason why porous hygroscopic materials' surface temperatures rose. Adding that, moisture adsorption and desorption lead to a significant change in temperature in both adsorption and desorption experiments [111]. Holcroft and Shea [112] conducted experiments on moisture buffering and latent heat effects in natural fiber insulation material and found a correlation between the sorption rate and the heat flux. Referring to Fig. 6, Fig. 7,the Pv variations through the bale thickness illustrate the occurrence of a sorption phenomenon (high pressure toward lower pressure) from the interior face towards the exterior face. This variation generates moisture transfer moisture, thus liberation of heat. This can clearly explain the discrepancy between the measured (from one side) and the theoretically calculated value. Since, the estimation was based solely on the entering heat flow without considering the latent heat diffused.
Fig. 7
Download: Download high-res image (730KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Temperature, relative humidity and vapor pressure profiles during period 3(left), period 4(right).

Fig. 8
Download: Download high-res image (569KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Thermal conductivity profiles over the four periods measured by the average method from the exterior/interior straw surfaces HFM, and from the extended average method.

The second potential factor is the instability of temperature gradient between the two faces over the tested periods. Fig. 9 illustrates the temperature difference variations through the testing period. The temperature gradient was greatly varying during a single testing period. For instance, it doubled in a single period, as shown in period 2. The influence of an unstable temperature gradient on the accuracy of thermal conductivity measurements is addressed in works such as Campbell and Norman [113]. Kukkonen & Suppala [114], pointed out that fluctuating or nonlinear temperature gradients in situ measurements can introduce significant errors in thermal conductivity value. This factor's inaccuracy is consistent with ISO 9869-1 guidelines, which are described in section 2.2.2. Under the identical experimental conditions, this fluctuation cannot be controlled. Nevertheless, this issue could be solved by heating the interior side of the wall.
Fig. 9
Download: Download high-res image (541KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Temperature difference between inner-outer surfaces of the straw bale (fluxmeters position).

On the other hand, the deviation from the theoretical was less than 10 % when the extended average method was employed for measurement. Also, as the test length increased the precision improved and the value converged more toward the effective value. As seen in period 2 the longest duration, the discrepancy was as low as 4.66 %.
Therefore, based on the mathematical demonstration and the previously presented evidence, it is recommended to use the extended average method to determine the effective thermal conductivity as a function of the mean temperature and relative humidity.
5. Conclusions and perspectives
This study presented an in-situ reliable measurement approach, known as extended average method to determine the effective thermal conductivity of wheat straw bales. The effectiveness of this technique has been proven by conducting a long-term experimental campaign on a full-scale wall under real world conditions.
The ISO 9869-1 average method has been also tested, however as previously presented in several works, its unreliability is highlighted by high uncertainties of up to 41.37 %. Whereas the extended average method has greatly aided in obtaining value with greater accuracy with an uncertainty of 4.66 %.
It was also noted that one of the primary drawbacks of the extended method is the requirement for a lengthy sampling time. Over the long experimental campaign, only limited number of periods have met selection criteria. Therefore, further research should focus on improving the circumstances in which the tests should be carried out such as heating the inner side of the wall.
Despite slight deviations from theoretical values and long measuring campaign. The extended method made it possible to estimate a 0.36 m thick, 80 kg/m3 with perpendicularly oriented stems wheat straw bale's in-service effective thermal conductivity under real-world conditions. This issue has not yet been fully investigated in a single continuous experiment till present and which will provide crucial data for energy audits.
Moreover, monitoring of this structure should be kept ongoing for an extended period and explore further experimental data. First, in order to compare it to other in-situ measuring techniques. Second, to evaluate the influence of natural aging on measurements and the thermal efficiency of wheat straw bales.
Future research will focus on investigating the suitability of the extended method for determining the effective thermal conductivity of different straw types, fiber density and orientation, as well as other fibrous porous hygroscopic materials, under various weather and occupancy situations.