Abstract
This work experimentally investigates the heat transfer rate obtained from confined circular jets onto electrically heated flat, convex, and concave target plates. The local Nusselt number – a dimensionless heat transfer coefficient – was measured across different levels of fluid confinement, plate curvature, and flow distance from the target plate's center, all under uniform heat flux conditions. Using water as the cooling fluid, experiments were conducted in a Reynolds number range of 5000–15000, with fixed jet diameter and plate curvature, while varying the plate-to-nozzle distance. The local Nusselt number data were obtained through a heat exchange device, with temperatures recorded by digital sensors connected to a programmable platform. Measurements were taken at the central jet impingement point and at five radial intervals, up to 25 mm. Results show that the local Nusselt number for the concave plate was approximately twice that of the flat plate at the center point of impact of the jet, while the convex plate exhibited values 1.6 times higher at a Reynolds number of 15000. The concave target plate presented a heat transfer performance that was 51.8 % higher than the flat plate at its lowest confinement level and throughout the monitored radial flow range.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Heat transferConfined jetsTarget plateFlat plateConcave plateConvex plate
LIST OF SYMBOLS

[m2]	Orifice area of jet nozzle
[m2]	Surface area of target plate
[m2]	Base area of target plate
[m]	Jet orifice diameter
[mm]	Effective diameter of target plate
[mm]	Bending radius of target plate
[mm]	Distance between target plate and jet
[m]	Target plate base thickness
[mm]	Radial distance from stagnation point
[W/(m2.K)]	Local average convective heat transfer coefficient
[W/(m2.K)]	External convection heat transfer coefficient
[W/(m.K)]	Fluid thermal conductivity
[W/(m.K)]	Thermal conductivity of target plate base
[−]	Local Nusselt number
[−]	Average Nusselt number
[−]	Stagnation point Nusselt number
[−]	Prandtl number
[W/m2]	Total heat flux
[W/m2]	Lost heat flux
[W/m2]	Real heat flux
[W]	Total heat generated rate
[−]	Reynolds number of the jet at the nozzle orifice exit
[kg/s]	Fluid mass flow rate
[kg/(m.s)]	Dynamic viscosity of the fluid
[°C]	Temperature
[m/s]	Average fluid velocity
[%]	Combined standard uncertainty of output estimative
[V]	Electric Voltage Difference
[A]	Electric current
[kg/m3]	Fluid density
Special characters		

[−]
[−]	Fluid at the inlet of the device or at the discharge of the jet
Fluid at the outlet of the device
[−]	Fluid film at the interface with the target plate surface
[−]	Target Plate Surface
[−]	External environment
1. Introduction
Impinging jets, known for their ability to provide high rates of heat and mass transfer combined with simple equipment design, are widely used in the process industry for cooling or heating through convective transport, with or without phase change. This has been a subject of great importance for developing thermal equipment and in experimental studies in the heat transfer area. Its applications include the cooling of gas turbine blades, the uniform and controlled cooling in glass tempering, the drying of fabric via directional air jets, the controlled cooling during metal annealing, metal cutting, the extraction of chemical compounds from solids, the heating and cooling of mixtures in tanks, the cooling of electronic equipment, among others.
In heat transfer via jet impingement, a gaseous fluid or liquid falls at high speed on the target surface of a material at a different temperature, to generate a highly convective heat flow.
The jet can be classified as confined or free. In a confined jet, heat transfer and fluid flow are affected by the surface parallel to the target surface; and in the free jet, the parallel surface is sufficiently distant from the target surface to affect both. Jets can also be classified as surface or submerged free jet; in the first case, the effect of the surface shear stress of the jet flow is negligible, and in the second case, the jet flow is affected. The shape of the jet nozzle can be the circular type, with an axisymmetrical flow profile, or the slotted type, with a two-dimensional flow profile.
Research on heat transfer via impinging liquid jets was initially applied to oil cooling systems, to internal combustion engines, and to the heat treatment of metals. There is also a great motivation in the area of microelectronics, having as an application the cooling of integrated circuits for computers.
Colucci and Viskanta [1] conducted experiments with confined air jets impinging on a flat plate, comparing the hyperbolic and circular geometry of nozzles in heat transfer. The authors concluded that when the nozzle-to-plate distance ratio decreases from 6 to 1, the Nusselt numbers increase across the entire radius of the target plate, except at the stagnation point.
Li and Garimella [2] carried out experiments in the area of impinging submerged and confined jets with water and integrated them into a series of experiments previously carried out by Rice and Garimella [3], with Prandtl numbers for the air and the Fluorinert FC-77. Both experiments used the same device, serving as a database to determine the effect of fluid properties on heat transfer rate. The parameter range adopted includes an orifice diameter of 1.59 ≤ d ≤ 12.7 mm at Ө = 90° in relation to the target plate; a Prandtl's number of 0.7 ≤ Pr ≤ 25.2, and Reynolds between 8500 ≤ Re ≤ 23000. Finally, the average Nusselt number maintained a maximum average deviation of 4.14 %.
Baydar and Ozmen [4] performed an experimental and numerical study of the flow field of a confined jet of air impinging on a flat plate and within a Reynolds range between 30000 and 50000, and observed a region of low pressure after the region of the stagnation point, which becomes stronger with the decrease of nozzle-to-plate spacing. Gao and Ewing [5] observed that a confined circular air jet showed an increase of up to 10 % in heat transfer for nozzle-to-plate ratios higher than Z/d > 1, within a Reynolds range between 17000 and 28000. However, for nozzle-to-plate ratios lower than Z/d ≤ 0.5 a reduction in the Nusselt number of up to 50 % was observed at positions above the radius-to-nozzle ratio r/d > 1.5. Tão Guan et al. [6] conducted a numerical study of the heat transfer of a set of air jets in a row, over a confined concave surface, with and without openings that altered the geometry of the flow. The motivation is to reduce the formation of ice on the leading edge of an aircraft's wings. The authors observed that the improvement of heat transfer occurs to high Reynolds numbers and low plate-nozzle distance ratios in the impact region and in the surroundings, with the openings that result in increasing the velocity of the jet core, as well as turbulent mixing.
Sharad et al. [7] conducted an experimental and numerical study of heat transfer and impact flow from a slit-shaped jet of air on a heated circular cylinder, with and without flow confinement. As the main feature of the experiment, the cylinder with circular, quadrilateral, and hexagonal flow confinements, with openings at the top and bottom, was investigated. The Nusselt number, due to quadrilateral and hexagonal confinements, was between 20 % and 42 %, respectively.
Sharad et al. [8] conducted experimental and numerical studies of heat transfer and flow characteristics, where jets of air from a tube with aligned and misaligned circular holes fall on a heated cylinder, i.e., a convex surface. The motivation is for the cooling of long cylinders in the tempering process. The maximum average heat transfer was 14 % for misaligned holes, with dimensionless plate-nozzle ratios of 2, between diameters of 5.5, and spacing between adjacent jets of 2.1 in Reynolds 20000.
Marius et al. [9] carried out an experimental and numerical investigation of the heat transfer of a set of circular jets of air over a concave target plate. The chamber where the impact of the jets occurs also has holes for film cooling, which, according to the authors, adds realism to fluid flow. The authors intended the experiment for cooling the concave leading edge of generic gas turbine blades. The authors observed that crossflow associated with static pressure due to flow within the chamber revealed a negative impact on the Nusselt number at the stagnation point, by altering the Reynolds number due to the pressure gradient formed in the region. They also observed that the crossflow provided a more homogeneous distribution of heat transfer, but the losses in the stagnation region could not be compensated.
Saeed et al. [10] conducted an experimental and numerical investigation of the heat transfer and flow characteristics of a circular pulsed jet of air over a heated metal surface with concave geometry. The numerical investigation focused on simulating jet holes with circular, elliptical, rectangular, and square geometries and jet performed for the frequency ranges of 25 Hz–100 Hz and Reynolds number of 7000. The authors observed that as the jet nozzle moves away from the surface, the average Nusselt number decreases and the rate of air entrainment increases. It was found that circular/square and elliptical/rectangular jets at high frequencies have increased average Nusselt by around 22 % and 15 %, respectively.
The analysis of confined liquid fluid flow over curved surfaces represents a relevant experimental differential, as curvature significantly alters the fluid dynamic behavior and the efficiency of heat transfer. Although the literature presents various studies involving different fluids, surfaces, nozzle diameters, and geometries under a range of Reynolds numbers, there remains a gap in the investigation of the post-confinement of the fluid. The capture and recirculation of the fluid are essential for controlling its temperature and preserving its physicochemical properties over time.
In this context, this study employs a heat exchange device designed to eventually be integrated into a small-scale solar radiation concentrator system. The incident radiation on the device's external surface is converted into heat, which is then transferred to an internal surface. A fluid jet (e.g., oil or water) impinges perpendicularly on this heated surface, and the absorbed heat can be stored and later used in other systems. At this stage of the study, water was used as the working fluid to simplify the analysis of the device's thermal behavior.
Additionally, while most previous studies use air as the heat transfer medium and operate under non-confined geometries, the present work demonstrates the effectiveness of liquid cooling on both concave and convex surfaces. This approach is particularly promising for applications that require high densities of thermal dissipation and fluid reuse, such as solar concentrators for green hydrogen production (Solartron Energy's) and photovoltaic concentrator systems with high-efficiency cells (Fraunhofer ISE).
The advantage of the high localized heat transfer rate intrinsic to the liquid fluid brings challenges related to the sealing of the system at the thermal exchange interface, where it is necessary to consider the expansions and contractions of different types of materials, thermal degradation-induced corrosion, and elastomeric seals that withstand continuous heat exposure. We can also mention the use of a single jet for heat removal from the surface area of the target plate, which is a lot larger than the jet diameter, potentially leading to hot spots as a consquence of recirculation and preferential fluid flow due to localized outlets.
Therefore, the main objective of this experimental work is to investigate the thermal cooling behavior of a heated metallic surface under the condition of constant heat flow, through the perpendicular impingement of a cold-water flow at high speed, generated by a submerged circular jet in a confined chamber. Heat transfer rates are compared between different target plate – flat, convex, and concave. One of the limiting factors of the study was keeping the nozzle diameter and the curvature ratio of the convex and concave plates fixed. The decision to maintain a fixed, small nozzle diameter was due to the complex integration of the fluid's pumping capacity and the associated pressure drop caused by confined flow, the power required to heat the target plate, achieving Reynolds numbers within the range reported by other authors, and at the same time, enabling observable temperature fluctuations from the fixed sensors on the target plate. The curvature ratio remained fixed, due to the difficult attachment of the temperature sensors to the surface of the target plate in steeper curvatures – and developing a device to capture the temperature across the entire curved radial range is even more challenging. Finally, the curvature ratio adopted showed, in a previous prototype, a considerable variation in the local Nusselt number as a function of the radius.
Apparently, there are no studies in the literature that directly address the specific configuration adopted in this work — that is, liquid jets in confined environments impinging on flat, concave, and convex surfaces. The studies by Li and Garimella [2] and Saeed et al. [10] present different configurations, such as semi-confined flat surfaces with lateral outlets or open concave surfaces, which limits the possibility of direct comparisons. This scarcity of similar studies reinforces the originality of the present work and highlights the need to advance the understanding of fluid behavior and heat trasnfer in configurations closer to real applications, such as the one investigated here.
Two specific objectives were proposed for the experimental evaluation of heat transfer. The first evaluates Nusselt at the stagnation point and the second, Nusselt along the radial direction.
2. Experiment
The main component of the experiment is the heat exchange device, where the mechanism of heat transfer by forced convection takes place through a single submerged and confined jet of water, which impinges perpendicularly on an electrically heated metal surface, called target plate, under a constant heat flux condition.
2.1. Device
The heat exchange device is composed of the body (1), bakelite ring (2), piston (3), nozzle (4), target plate (5), and target plate base (6) and is best illustrated in this section in Fig. 1a, b, 1c, in detail in Fig. 1d and physically in Fig. 2a, b, 2c, 2d, and 2e. Fig. 1a, b, 1c serve to facilitate the understanding of the fluid flow, the limits of the target plate; heat source; and the level of confinement of the chamber, since the proportions were maintained in the design.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (262KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (333KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (316KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (936KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. a – Simple cross section - Flat Plate. 1b– Simple cross section - Convex Plate. 1c – Simple cross section - Concave Plate. 1d – Detailed cross section.

Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (891KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Assembled heat exchange device, piston, and target plates.

The heat exchange device consists of a cylindrical hollow aluminum body (1), with dimensions of 150 mm long x 110 mm in diameter and 7 mm in thickness. A Bakelite ring (2) with a thickness of 8 mm and thermal conductivity k = 0,2 W/(m.K) is internally overlapped and ensures partial thermal insulation of the fluid with the inner wall of the body. See Fig. 2a. The piston (3) is a cylindrical piece machined from solid aluminum, with dimensions of 80 mm in diameter and 20 mm in thickness. It supports the nozzle (4), the fluid inlet (3.1) and outlet (3.2) channels in the confined chamber (7), as well as the fixed thermal insulation in the PLA (poly lactic acid polymer) printed piston, with a thickness of 4 mm and k = 0,18 W/(m.K). The tightness of the interface between the piston and the Bakelite ring (2) is provided by rubber sealing rings (3.3). See Fig. 2b. Nozzle (4) with bell mouth shape, in Copper (70 %) and Zinc (30 %) alloy with a thermal conductivity of 109 W/(m.K), with an inlet diameter of 4 mm, an end of 1 mm, and a total length of 12 mm, result in a ratio at the jet output with a ratio of l/d = 2. The nozzle (4) is threaded into the piston body (3), providing a straight, oncentrated, spray-free jet. The target plate (5) comprises a Nickel and Chromium alloy blade (80/20 %), 65 mm long, 10 mm wide, and 0.1 mm thick. Its electrical resistance is 0.90 Ω/m, and the average roughness of the jet impingement surface is Ra = 0.137 μm for the three types of plates, and the sampling or cut-off length of 1.5 mm is evaluated according to ABNT NBR ISO 4287 [11]. The target plate (5) is transversely fixed on a circular base (6) printed in PLA, with dimensions of 80 mm in diameter and 15 mm in thickness. The projections of the convex (5.1) and concave (5.2) target plates are shown in Fig. 1d, as well as their boundary limits next to the piston. See Fig. 2c, d and 2e. The base of the target plate (6) is printed in PLA and thermally isolates the confined chamber (7) from the back of the target plate that is in contact with the external environment. The base (6) accommodates the temperature sensors and their electrical connections, as well as a channel that fixes the Ni/Cr blade (target plate) close to the surface. The underside of the target plate is sealed in the base channel through an adhesive for smooth surfaces. The base channel is an indentation on the surface of the base of the plate (channel), with the width and length of the target plate, and has the function of aligning the surface of the target plate with the surface of the base of the plate. The tightness of the interface between the base of the target plate (6) and the Bakelite ring (2) is provided by rubber sealing rings (6.1).
The function of the target plate (5) is to provide the heat flow corresponding to the two sides of the plate, in a unidirectional way, i.e. to the interior of the confined chamber and along the entire length of the plate, i.e. uniformly, so that when it is being cooled by the cold water jet, they allow the temperature sensors located every 5 mm at the T0, T1, T2, T3, T4, and T5 points to measure the variation in its surface temperature (Ts), as the fluid flows from center to the periphery, that is, in the increase of the radius.
The sensors (8) of all variables such as temperature, voltage, and current are also indicated where they were positioned, while the flow sensor is a set of mass and time measurements and its indication is illustrative, being better described in the Equipment Flowchart.
2.2. Equipment flowchart
The equipment flowchart of the present experiment is illustrated in Fig. 3 and contains the interconnections that the main heat exchange device has with the various other systems that transform it into a confined jet heat transfer measurement equipment.
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (448KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Process flowchart - auxiliary systems of the heat exchange device.

As an operational description of the equipment, the experiment is conducted by draining water from the cold water tank (3) to the heat exchange device (1) through the diaphragm pump (5), until the measurements made by the temperature measurement and data acquisition system (7) (8) present a stable thermal condition. At the same time, the flow rate of cold water entering the heat exchange device (6) and the power used to heat the target plate (2) in the required experimental condition were adjusted. The data acquisition system (7) (8) fills in specific columns of an electronic spreadsheet on average every 3 s, and the temperature, flow, and power data are converted into the respective Reynolds quantities and, finally, local Nusselt number, in each radius position reported in Fig. 1d.
The equipment consists of a heat exchange device (1) previously detailed in Subsection 2.1 and Fig. 1d; a system for generating and measuring the electrical power applied to the target plate (2); a mass flow generation and measurement system (6); a temperature measurement system (1b); and a data acquisition system (7) (8).
The system of generation and measurement of the electrical power applied in the heating of the target plate was supplied by an electrical system with regulation of the voltage and therefore of the power. The power was found by measuring the voltage and current drop passing through the fixed resistive load (target plate).
This system has the following components: a 127/24 VAC step-down transformer (2b), a 24 VAC voltage regulator manually adjusted via a potentiometer (2a), an alternating voltage rectifier bridge to half-wave with a capacity of 50 A (2c), and a 40 A bipolar thermomagnetic circuit breaker (2d).
For the measurement of the voltage of the power source, a voltage sensor module (2e) based on the principle of voltage division was used, with analog output from 0 to 5 V and external measuring range from 0 to 25 VDC. To measure the current of the power source, a non-invasive current sensor (2f), model SCT-013 manufactured by YHDC, was used. This sensor is based on Faraday's law of induction, meeting an input current range from 0 to 100 A and output current equal to the input current divided by 50 mA, coupled in series to a 33-Ω load resistor, in order to reduce the voltage and perform the reading from 0 to 5 V on the analog port of the microcontroller (7).
The mass flow generation and measurement system is measured by an electronic scale (6) with a Strain Gauge load cell (6a) positioned under the hot water reservoir (4), with the time count synchronized by the data acquisition system. The system consists of a cold water tank (3) and a hot water tank (4); both with a capacity of 10 L; a diaphragm-type pump (5) with a capacity of up to 6 l/min - 0.9 MPa and electronically adjusted flow control via potentiometer (5a). The cold fluid is pumped from the cold reservoir and after passing through a particulate filter (5b), pressure relief valve (5c), manometer (5d), and shut-off valve (5e), it enters and exits the heat exchange device (1) and is discharged into the hot water reservoir (4), during the period of an experimental run. The diaphragm-type pump made it possible to reach Reynolds numbers of up to 18000. Each experimental run is evaluated at a total time interval of 11 min and 40 s. Part of the initial measurements were discarded experimentally to adjust and stabilize the pump flow rate to the experimental range of Reynolds numbers of interest. To find the mass flow (ṁ) and consequently adjust the Reynolds number in each experiment, the mass of water entering the hot water reservoir (4) was measured in synchrony with the experimental time reported by the system and data acquisition. An HX711 (6b) 24-bit converter and amplifier module manufactured by AVIA Semiconductor is used to amplify the Strain Gauge signal and send it to the microcontroller (7). The specifications of the converter module have an operating voltage between 4.8 and 5.5 VDC, an operating current of 1.6 mA, and an SPI (synchronous serial communication) interface.
The temperature measurement system indicated in the flowsheet contemplates the position of the cold water inlet sensors in the confined chamber through the jet 
, the surface temperature of the target plate 
, and the hot water outlet of the chamber 
. The temperatures at the surface of the target plate (
), a total of six measuring points T0 to T5, were obtained by encapsulated DS18B20 sensors positioned under the surface of the target plate. Prior to attaching the sensors and in order to maintain the contact of the sensor with the surface, a small amount of thermal paste is applied between the sensor and the target plate in order to reduce the thermal resistance of contact at the interface. Subsequently, the temperature sensors were accommodated and fixed to the face of the Ni/Cr sheet (target plate) through a special adhesive for smooth surfaces. The encapsulated sensors are type DS18B20 manufactured by Dallas Semiconductor and their measurement range is between −55 °C and 125 °C, with an uncertainty of ±0.5K. Its programmable digital output can be incremented by 0.5K (9-bit), 0.25K (10-bit), 0.125K (11-bit), and 0.0625K (12-bit), with a refresh time of 750 ms and supply voltage of 3.0 and 5.5 VDC. The sensor has a One-Wire protocol and each DS18B20 has its own 64-bit ID code.
The data acquisition system monitors the surface temperatures of the target plate, water inlet and outlet in the heat exchange device, the mass flow rate of water passing through the device, and the current and voltage applied to the target plate. The data is sent to the digital and analog input and output ports (7a) on the Arduino microcontroller (7) and via RS-485 serial communication (7b) to a USB port on the microcomputer (8). With the help of the Arduino Nano Integrated Development Environment – IDE (8a), the acquisition data fills an electronic spreadsheet in real-time (8c), through an interface software called Arduino Excel 3.0 (8b). This interface software developed by Roberto Valgolio (2021) has the function of communicating the data between the Arduino platform and the spreadsheet, using the latter as a place to record and process the data. The system fills in the columns of a spreadsheet on average every 3 s. The time interval of each experiment is 11 min and 40 s (700 s), totaling approximately 230 data samples, and the initial 80 samples were discarded, serving only to adjust the water flow, the power used in the heating of the target plate and in the thermal balance of the system. This experiment is performed repeatedly three times for the same Z/d ratio, for each geometric configuration of the target plate.
2.3. Theory and calculation
Li and Garimella [2], demonstrate that at the point of collision of the fluid with the target plate and as the flow radially moves to the periphery of the latter, there is the formation of an imaginary regional division of the surface, determined by different profiles of flow, temperature and, consequently, different coefficients of heat transfer by convection. Fig. 5 details in proportion the approximate limit interval that is occupied by the stagnation regions, secondary peak, as well as wall jet region, which forms beyond the secondary peak.
The stagnation region (5) forms on the surface of the target plate, immediately below the nozzle orifice (1), in the shock of the cold fluid against the target plate. According to Li and Garimella [2], the region covers a surface area of radius equivalent to 1.9 times the diameter of the jet orifice (5) from the center of the target plate (2). The projection of the position of the temperature sensor (3) and the base (4) are also represented.
The secondary heat transfer peak region (6) occurs after the stagnation region (5) and also forms near the surface of the target plate. According to Sun et al. [12], it forms in the boundary layer, in the transition from the laminar to turbulent flow regime. The region encompasses a final surface area of up to 4 times the nozzle orifice diameter. Thus, as proportionally indicated in Fig. 5, the secondary peak region has its boundaries between 1.9 x d < r < 4 x d (mm). At the end of the secondary peak, the formation of the wall jet (7) drags the surrounding fluid more intensely, slowing down the flow with the increase in surface area, and reducing heat transfer.
According to Li and Garimella [2], another particularity observed comprises the static pressure formed in the stagnation region, if the jet orifice remains at a distance of less than two nozzle diameters from the target plate, influencing the potential core of the jet immediately after its exit from the orifice. The experiment avoided plate-to-nozzle ratios lower than Z/d = 2, due to the effect of the static pressure mentioned above, keeping the diameter of the nozzle fixed at d = 1 mm. This nozzle diameter enabled Reynolds numbers of around 18000 to be reached, allowing a low electrical power to be expended to heat the target plate. Increasing the measured temperature range between the heated surface of the target plate and the cold fluid entering through the nozzle reduces deviations from the heat transfer estimate.
The empirical correlations used in the calculation of the local Nusselt number, from which the correct coefficient of heat transfer by convection can be obtained, result from a sequence of steps guided by Kreith and Bohn [13], where.
-
The properties of the cooling fluid are evaluated at the film temperature (
), given by the average surface temperature of the target plate (
) and the inlet temperature (
);
-
The axisymmetric flux of the impinging jet submerged and confined over the target plate, its distance from the nozzle, and the range of Prandtl and Reynolds number are similar to the study described by Li and Garimella [2] and served as the constructive basis for the heat exchange device described in this work;
-
The interval adopted for the Reynolds number meets a small mass flow of fluid through an orifice with 1 mm in diameter 
, suitable for the dimensions of the device, in a range for the performance of the experiment between 5000<Re < 15000, covering the laminar, transition, and turbulent flow regions;
-
Heat transfer is essentially governed by forced convection near the jet impingement on the target plate and much of the axial flow, however, the flow loses velocity along the fluid outlet channels and possibly generates a region of mixed convection.
The intermediate equations indicated below were used to find the Reynolds and local Nusselt number experimentally. At first, from the measurement of the mass flow (
ṁ
) found by Eq. (1) and in possession of the diameter of the nozzle orifice 
 and the dynamic viscosity of the fluid 
 at film temperature, is the Reynolds number indicated in Eq. (2).
(1)
ṁ
(2)
ṁ
Eq. (3) approximates the total heat generation (
 of the target plate from the voltage and current drop, measured by their respective sensors.
(3)
The lost heat flux 
 indicated in Eqs. (5), (6) is subtracted from the total heat flux 
, indicated in Eqs. (4), (7) to find the actual heat flux 
.
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
The actual heat flux is the heat flux that is transferred through the top surface of the target plate and exchanges heat in contact with the fluid that flows internally into the confined chamber, while a small fraction is transferred through the base of the target plate to the external environment as indicated in Fig. 1d. In possession of the actual heat flux 
 and the surface temperatures (
) and fluid inlet (
), the local average convection heat transfer coefficient 
 is found through Eq. (8).
(8)
In possession of the latter, the coefficient of thermal conductivity of the fluid 
 at film temperature and orifice diameter 
, is the experimental local Nusselt number 
 for impinging jets, as indicated in Eq. (9) below.
(9)
The experimental local Nusselt numbers found at the stagnation point were compared with the local Nusselt number found from correlations of other authors. The correlation indicated in Eq. (10) corresponds to the type of free jet found by Liu et al. [14].
(10)
The correlation indicated in Eq. (11) meets the submerged jet type - Sun et al. [12].
(11)
The correlation indicated in Eq. (12) meets the confined jet type - Li and Garimella [2].
(12)
The parameters adopted by the authors are similar to the experiment because the jet is of the circular type without spraying detected experimentally at Re = 15000, and the cooling fluid fits the range of Pr > 3, both in a condition of uniform heat flux. It was proposed to explore estimates of the local Nusselt number in particular for the stagnation point, in plate-to-nozzle ratios Z/d = 2, radius-to-nozzle r/d = 0, in a range of Reynolds numbers between 5000 and 15000.
The main changes used to evaluate the behavior of the dimensionless convection heat transfer coefficient (Nud) of the three plate shapes are given by the Reynolds number and the geometric ratios. Three geometric ratios were adopted. See Fig. 1d.
The first ratio takes into account the distance (Z) and the diameter of the nozzle (d), and is called the plate-to-nozzle ratio Z/d. The distance (Z) is the distance from the surface of the target plate to the parallel surface immediately above, providing the creation of levels of confinement for the same Reynolds number and fluid flow orientation. Experimental ratios were adopted for all plate shapes at Z/d = 2, 4, and 6.
The second ratio considers the relative curvature R/De of the target plate and is the ratio of the bending radius of the target plate (R) to the outer diameter of the jet's impinging surface (De). This ratio seeks to change the flow behavior on the surface of the curved target plates and to compare it with the flat target plate. Fixed values of R = 100 mm and De = 80 mm were adopted, with no effect for the flat target plate and a curvature ratio of 1.25 for the convex and concave target plates.
The third ratio takes into account the distance from the radius (r) to the center of the target plate and the diameter of the nozzle (d), and is called the radius-to-nozzle ratio r/d. The measurement of the surface temperature of the target plate takes place at six points, every 5 mm, from r = 0 mm to r = 25 mm, with r/d ratios = 0, 5, 10, 15, 20, and 25. These ratios measure the local Nusselt number at the stagnation point and local Nusselt number as runoff moves away from the center.
2.4. Measurement uncertainty assessment
Three repeated experiments were performed for each Z/d ratio and geometric configuration of plate and Reynolds number. In the interval of each Reynolds number, 10 measurements were collected, totaling 30 experimental measurements of temperature, flow, and power. The combined standard uncertainty of the local Nusselt number fluctuated between 6.50 % and 7.60 %, and Reynolds between 6.4 % and 11.9 % in a Re range of approximately 5000 at the point of the ratio r/d = 25 mm for all geometric configurations of target plate and Z/d ratios. The measurement uncertainties of: mass flow ±4.5 %, target plate surface temperature ±2.4 %, water inlet, and outlet temperature ±2.3 % did not exceed these percentages. The largest contribution to the uncertainty in the Nusselt and Reynolds numbers was the uncertainties of uniform heat flux with about ±1.9 % and jet hole diameter ±5.8 %, respectively. Nusselt uncertainty is also composed of other sources of uncertainty, such as conduction losses for the external environment, around 1.10 %, accounted for in the actual heat flux according to Eqs. (5), (6), (7), signal transducers and the data acquisition system itself. In terms of comparison of Nusselt uncertainties in the literature, Li and Garimella [2] and Gao and Ewing [5], for example, reported total Nusselt uncertainties as ±4.14 % and ±9.0 %, respectively. Although the uncertainty range of the Nusselt and Reynolds numbers in this study falls within the range reported by other authors, higher values may be found due to the limited robustness of the microelectronics in the numerous signal transducers.
The performance of the jet at low velocity at point ‘T5’ with r/d ratio = 25 at Reynolds 5000, the formation of a thick wall jet, the level of turbulence, followed by the loss of flow velocity at the end of the radial contributed to the increase in the value of the combined standard uncertainty. The graph in Fig. 4a, b, and 4c shows the combined standard uncertainty Nusselt percent 
% and Reinalds 
 (Re ∼ 5000) for the fixed ratio r/d = 25 mm, Z/d ratios = 2, 4, and 6, and geometric configurations of flat, convex, and concave target plate, respectively.
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (188KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (187KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (183KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. a, 4b, 4c. Combined standard uncertainty Nusselt percent 
% and Reynolds 
.

Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (298KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Proportional illustration of the top view of the stagnation, secondary peak, and wall jet regions on the target plate.

3. Results and discussion
3.1. First specific objective - nusselt stagnation point
The first specific objective of the proposed experiment is to assess the heat transfer performance for each target plate shape, associated with the best ratio between the plate-to-nozzle distance (Z/d) at the stagnation point. The experiment compares the resulting local Nusselt numbers, in a range of Reynolds values, adopting plate-to-nozzle ratios Z/d. The diameter of the nozzle orifice remained fixed at d = 1.0 mm, as well as the relative curvature of the concave and convex target plate at 1.25. Surface temperature measurement was performed by the temperature sensor T0, positioned at radius r = 0 mm, i.e., in the center of the target plate, at the stagnation point. See the sensor projection previously indicated in Fig. 1d.
Fig. 6a, b, and 6c show the experimental of each plate shape, in the case, flat, convex, and concave target plates, respectively, for plate-to-nozzle distances of Z = 2, 4, and 6 mm, or Z/d ratios = 2, 4, and 6, with Reynolds numbers punctually evaluated at 5000, 10000, and 15000.
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (433KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (433KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (433KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. a – Flat Plate Nu x Re Z = 2, 4 and 6 mm and r = 0 mm (stagnation point). 6b – Convex Plate Nu x Re Z = 2, 4 and 6 mm and r = 0 mm (stagnation point). 6c – Concave Plate Nu x Re Z = 2, 4 and 6 mm and r = 0 mm (stagnation point).

It was observed that in all plate shapes, the local Nusselt number increases as Reynolds increases. The concave target plate presents remarkable local Nusselt numbers when compared to the flat and convex target plates; the latter maintaining lower local Nusselt numbers throughout the Reynolds range, regardless of the Z/d ratio. The flat plate presents higher local Nusselt numbers compared to the convex plate at Re = 5000 and ratios Z/d = 4 and 6, being surpassed by the convex plate as Reynolds increases. It can also be seen that the convex plate presents, for the Z/d = 2,4, and 6 ratios, a growth rate below but in line with the local average Nusselt growth observed for the concave plate. On the other hand, the growth rate of the local Nusselt number of the flat plate is misaligned and lower than the previously mentioned convex plate, throughout the Reynolds range.
The Z/d = 2 flat plate presents the highest local Nusselt number at Re = 15000, followed by Z/d = 4 and Z/d = 6, about 18.3 % and 50 % lower. See Fig. 6a.
The Z/d = 2 convex plate presents the highest local Nusselt number at Re = 15000, followed by Z/d = 4 and Z/d = 6, about 25 % and 37.5 % lower. See Fig. 6b.
The Z/d = 6 concave plate presents the highest local Nusselt number at Re = 15000, followed by Z/d = 4 and Z/d = 2, about 2.4 % and 13.6 % lower. See Fig. 6c.
It was clear that, contrary to the performance that the concave target plate demonstrates in a plate-to-nozzle ratio Z/d = 6, it does not happen for the convex and flat target plates at a Z/d = 2 ratio.
Fig. 6a, b, and 6c clearly show the difference in local Nusselt number between the three plate shapes for the same Z/d = 2 ratio at Re = 15000. The heat transfer performance of the convex shape was approximately 58 % higher than the flat plate, while the concave plate was 78 %. The concave plate obtained the highest local Nusselt number with the plate-to-nozzle ratio Z/d = 6, about twice as high when compared to the best gain found in the flat plate at Z/d = 2. It was observed that the trend line expressing the growth rate of the local Nusselt number, for the concave and convex plates, with Reynolds ranging between 5000 and 15000, showed a similar behavior in their various Z/d ratios, but this same growth for the flat plate occurred more smoothly. One of the probable causes of the changes in the behavior of the Nusselt number near the stagnation point can be attributed to the orientation of the confined fluid flow, creating specific vortices at the outlet of the nozzle and disturbing the flow against the potential core of the jet, as well as the relative curvature of the target plate under the influence of the resulting confined flow.
The superior behavior of the concave plate in Z/d = 6 compared to the others in Z/d = 2, can be understood according to S.V. Garimella [15], where at larger spacings, the axial velocity of the jet decreases with the increase of the plate-nozzle distance; however the existence of large-scale structures in the mixing layer of the jet increases its turbulence, compensating for the drop in heat transfer due to the reduction in radial velocity. On the other hand, the author also points out that smaller plate-to-nozzle ratios Z/d = 2, visualized in the flat and convex plates, can have their heat transfer increased due to rewiring, and can act together with the transition region for turbulence in the boundary layer and cause secondary peaks.
In order to compare the average Nusselt numbers of the present study, in Fig. 7 we plotted other authors’ estimated points of the Nu x Re correlations. The Liu et al. [14] parameters of the free-jet correlation equations, Sun et al. [12] submerged jet, and Li et al. [2] confined jet, suitable for Equations (10), (11), (12), have been previously indicated. The region of the experimental heat transfer comparison study was limited to the ratios r/d = 0 and Z/d = 2, with Prandtl values of 6, 6.5, and 7 in Reynolds 5000, 10000, and 15000, respectively. The evaluation region was limited to the radius-to-nozzle ratio between 0 ≤ r/d < 0.787 for free jets and 0 ≤ r/d < 2 for submerged and confined jets, at Z/d = 2. Another limitation was to explore Reynolds numbers at 5000, 10000, and 15000, with Prandtl values of 6, 6.5, and 7, respectively.
Fig. 7
Download: Download high-res image (438KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Nu x Re, Z/d = 2, Re = 5000–15.000, comparison between different authors.

In comparison with other authors, it was observed in Fig. 7 that the confined jet of all plate shapes of this experiment did not exceed the local Nusselt number for the configurations of the free, submerged, or confined jet type, all assessed in Z/d = 2 and Reynolds number ranging between 5000 and 15000. The confined flat plate correlation data proposed by Li and Garimella [2], an assembly configuration that most closely resembled the experimental device of this work, surpasses by 76 % the best experimental heat transfer performance found in the concave plate Reynolds 15000 and 5000, respectively. We warn that Li and Garimella's [2] experimental heat transfer device was considered the closest and most complete study compared to the experimental device proposed here, but it is still considered semi-confined, because the geometric configuration of the authors' device presents fluid flow discharges free of obstacles on the sides. The lower comparative heat transfer rate of the present experiment can be explained in part by the geometry, but mainly due to the confined flow path after impinging on the target plate, where the fluid outlet orifices are away from the peripheral edges, flowing through two orifices in positions equidistant from the center, through the inside of the piston. Another factor that places the experimental data inferior in comparison to the similar confined flow of Li and Garimella [2], is the shape of the bell-mouth nozzle indicated in 2.1, compared to the author's square corner nozzle. According to the author in S.V. Garimella [15], the existence of a separation bubble that forms right at the entrance of the nozzle hole (vena contracta) reduces its diameter by up to 60 %, increasing the Reynolds number and therefore Nusselt at the stagnation point. The ratio l/d = 2 mentioned in 2.1 may also have reduced the expectation of heat transfer. According to S.V. Garimella [15], the heat transfer coefficients in any r/d ratio fall as the ratio increases from l/d = 1 to 4. Still observing the local Nusselt numbers resulting from the correlations of other authors indicated in Fig. 7, it was observed that the growth rate of heat transfer in the free-jet, submerged, and confined configuration presents a grouped, similar, and superior behavior as the Reynolds number grows, when compared to the experimental behavior. Compared to the increase in the Reynolds number, the growth rate of the local Nusselt number demonstrates a slightly superior performance for the concave and convex plate compared to the flat plate.
3.2. Second specific objective – nusselt radial direction
The second specific objective of the proposed experiment is to evaluate the behavior of the local Nusselt number for each target plate shape along the radial direction, in all Z/d plate-to-nozzle ratios and setting the Reynolds number at 15000. This objective also evaluates the overall average Nusselt 
, by comparing the area under the curve that forms throughout the radius increase for the highest performance plate-to-nozzle ratios and across all plate shapes. For this purpose, the diameter of the nozzle orifice remained fixed at d = 1.0 mm and the relative curvature of the concave and convex target plate was still fixed at 1.25.
Fig. 8a, b and 8c show the representation of the experimental data through the curves adjusted by the polynomial method, and the ratios r/d = 0, 5, 10, 15, 20, and 25 are applied to each target plate shape, which translate into distances from the center of the jet in millimeters since the diameter of the jet nozzle is fixed and equal to d = 1 mm.
Fig. 8
Download: Download high-res image (397KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8
Download: Download high-res image (410KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8
Download: Download high-res image (406KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8
Download: Download high-res image (332KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. a – Flat Plate Nud x r/d, Z = 2, 4 and 6 at Re = 15000. 8b – Convex Plate Nud x r/d, Z = 2, 4 and 6 at Re = 15000. c – Concave Plate Nud x r/d, Z = 2, 4 and 6 at Re = 15000. 8d – Normalization Nud/Nud,0 x r/d, Z = 2 at Re = 15000.

In all target plate shapes, the local Nusselt number are maximum in the position immediately below the jet nozzle – the place where the maximum heat transfer occurs, called the stagnation point; and decreases as the flow moves away from the jet center.
The flat target plate presented local Nusselt number at the stagnation point, on average lower than the convex and concave target plate, however, these same values remained higher in comparison to the convex target plate, in the range of the ratio 15 < r/d ≤ 25. The local Nusselt numbers for the plate-to-nozzle distance Z = 2 mm were higher than the Z = 4 and 6, respectively, in this order. A decrease in the local Nusselt number was observed in r/d = 0 to 10, for all assemblies of plate-nozzle distances Z = 2, 4, and 6 mm, respectively in this order.
The convex target plate, on average, presented local Nusselt number lower than the concave target plate and higher than the flat target plate up to r/d = 15 and lower to the end of the r/d = 25 ratio. The local Nusselt numbers for the plate-nozzle distance Z = 2 mm were higher than the Z = 4 and 6 mm, respectively in this order. Also on the convex target plate, a rapid decrease in the local Nusselt number was observed in r/d = 0 to 10, for all assemblies of plate-nozzle distances Z = 2, 4, and 6 mm, respectively in this order, showing a behavior different from that observed in comparison with the concave plate, but similar to the flat plate. The concave target plate showed local Nusselt number at the stagnation point that were notably higher than the flat and convex target plate, keeping the Nusselt numbers on average higher than the other plates until the end of the r/d = 25 mm ratio. The local Nusselt numbers plate-nozzle distances Z = 6 were slightly higher than Z = 4 and 2, respectively in this order. An inversion of local Nusselt numbers was observed approximately between 10<r/d < 15, where Z = 2 mm surpasses with little intensity the other Z = 6 and 4, respectively in this order, until the end at r/d = 25.
It was observed in Fig. 8a, b and 8c that the behavior of the local Nusselt number presented significant changes, as the flow moved away from the potential jet core, the stagnation point. The flat plate presented 32 % lower heat transfer rates compared to the convex plate but recovered and remained high in the ratio range of 5 < r/d < 25, but still lower than the concave plate. For the convex plate, a somewhat different heat transfer rate profile was observed, because already in its initial instant at r = 0 mm, the heat transfer curve decreases rapidly and only remains close to the other curves between 10 < r/d < 25. The local Nusselt numbers of the concave plate are twice as high as the initial values of the flat plate, being about 30 % higher than the initial values of the convex plate. The curve presents a more uniform and high-performance heat transfer sustaining behavior compared to the convex plate in the range of the ratio 0 < r/d < 15, but naturally decreases and adds to the other curves at r/d > 15.
Rice and Garimella [3] identified a pattern of toroidal recirculating flow between the parallel confinement surfaces, in which the center of these vortices moves away from the center line of the jet, with increases in the Reynolds number, orifice diameter, and plate-to-nozzle distance ratio ‘Z/d’. In addition, more quiescent fluid was dragged close to the jet, a region considered to be at a higher level of confinement, due to the speed of the flow and pressure in the surroundings. According to the authors, it is speculated that the reconnection of the flow in the patterns mentioned above may contribute to the secondary peaks.
We can assume that the secondary peak of heat transfer, which has its end between 3 and 4 mm (about 4 times the diameter of the jet), partially supports the Nusselt numbers up to r/d = 5 for the flat and concave plates. On the other hand, the flow behavior of the confined fluid on the convex plate visibly affects the wall jet between 0 < r/d < 15.
The drop of the heat transfer rates for any of the geometric configurations is shown to be equivalent to a distance beyond the r/d ratio >15, i.e., above 15 mm from the center of the jet impingement.
The author S.V. Garimella [15] reports that outside the stagnation region, the velocity and levels of turbulence of the fluid decrease greatly; including for different nozzle diameters; explaining the absence of heat transfer performance of the wall jet, as it moves away from the stagnation point.
Fig. 8d shows the normalized local heat transfer profiles for the different surface geometries in Re 15000. The experimental points and the respective polynomial fit curves resulted from the oscillation of the interval measurements captured by the temperature sensors at the points r = 0, 5, 10, 15, 20, and 25 mm, converted and normalized to the Nusselt number, added to the oscillation of the numbers around Re 15000. The plate-nozzle space was kept fixed at Z = 2 mm, due to its high heat transfer rate and the large dispersion of Nusselt numbers observed at other distances, which would make it difficult to interpret the curves. The dispersion of the data groups was minimally shifted to provide visualization of the experimental points.
It is observed that the divergence in the behavior of the normalized data between the region of the stagnation point and the probable secondary peak can be attributed to the transition to the turbulent flow between 0<r/d < 5. A slight difference between the inflection points of the concave and plane curves is also noticeable, in relation to the convex curve. We can assume that the convex plate is endowed with vortices that impair the potential nucleus of the jet between 0<r/d < 5, unlike the flat and concave plate, which present a growth of heat transfer in the region. According to D. Schafer [16], peaks usually result from the transition to turbulence in the boundary layer of the wall jet, but in confined jets, they can be linked to the recirculation pattern at the outlet. We can observe that the flat plate curve delivers a better level of Nusselt number distribution, i.e., the flat geometry may exhibit a flow recirculation pattern that can be more predictable compared to curved geometries, at least within the ratio range of 5<r/d < 25. S.V. Garimella [15] reports that the recirculation patterns produced by the flat plate in higher Reynolds numbers have a flatter shape and the interaction with the quiescent fluid, beyond the confinement region, i.e., in a region away from the jet, increases as Reynolds increases.
Also as a part of the second objective, Fig. 9 presents a comparison of the average Nusselt number 
, evaluating the area under the curve that forms during the increase in radius, in the entire range of the ratio 0 
 r/d 
. The best heat transfer performance was adopted for each plate shape, i.e., the best Z/d ratio, where for the flat and convex plate it was Z/d = 2 and concave Z/d = 6. Considering the flat plate as a reference base for the evaluation of 
, in Fig. 9, it was observed that the convex plate presents a percentage increase of average Nusselt number of around 18 %, and the concave plate presents a percentage increase of average Nusselt number of around 51.8 %.
Fig. 9
Download: Download high-res image (284KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. 
 x r/d at Re = 15000.

The average Nusselt number evaluation in Fig. 9 expresses the heat transfer performance of the plate shapes across the radial flow spectrum, resulting in a significant advantage of the concave target plate and mainly informing the constructive limits of future equipment.
4. Conclusions
The present study compared the effect of the curvature between flat and curved surfaces, the level of confinement, and the plate-nozzle spacing on the heat transfer rate at the stagnation point and in five other radial intervals from the jet center. For the experimental heat transfer measurements, a device was manufactured featuring a circular water jet with a fixed diameter, an electrically heated target plate, and a confined chamber with adjustable plate-nozzle distance, with one fluid inlet and two point outlets. The curvature ratio of the curved surfaces also remained constant.
-
At the stagnation point, all geometries showed consistently high heat transfer rates as Reynolds increased, with emphasis on the concave surface that doubled its performance in relation to the flat, with the convex being about 1.6 times higher.
-
The flat and convex plates showed the highest local and average heat transfer rates at a high confinement level (Z = 2 mm), while the concave plate was at a low level (Z = 6 mm).
-
The flat plate delivers a better distribution of Nusselt numbers, suggesting a more uniform flow behavior compared to curved surfaces, as the fluid flows as a wall jet, i.e., from the jet center toward the edge.
-
The convex surface did not exhibit a prominent secondary peak of heat transfer near the jet, being lower than that of the flat and concave surface.
-
The concave target plate showed a heat transfer performance with average Nusselt, 
, about 51.8 % higher than the flat plate, in the entire radial flow spectrum, resulting in a significant advantage of the concave target plate and mainly, informing the constructive limits of future equipment.
-
The experimental results at the stagnation point demonstrate that the semi-confined flow on a flat plate studied by Li and Garimella [2], a device that resembles the one used in the present study, outperforms by 76 % the best experimental heat transfer performance observed on the concave plate at Reynolds 15000.
-
The results of the study reflect the influence of impact surface curvature, chamber design, confinement level, fluid discharge positioning, and probable fluid recirculation zones on heat transfer performance at the stagnation point and over the radius of the target plate. It is likely that these results cannot be generalized to other devices with curved surfaces without experimental investigation into vortex formation caused by confinement.