3. Experimental Details
Failure investigation was conducted on the cracked heater tube. The investigation included visual examination of the tube
surfaces and deposits before and after splitting the tube into halves. Also, measurements were done for the variation in the tube wall
thickness and deposits. The deposits inside the tube were scrubbed off the surface and analyzed using X-ray diffraction (XRD). Water
extract of the deposits was also prepared, and pH measurement was taken.
Also, cross-sectional specimens were cut from the tube and metallographically prepared for microhardness measurements, as well
as microscopic examinations and analysis of the material. The sections were cut at the crack location and away from the crack. The
microhardness measurements (in Vickers) were conducted on a polished crosssection, using diamond pyramid indenter at an applied
Fig. 1. Camera photographs showing (a) as-received tube section; (b) circumferential crack seen after removal of studs; (c) deposited black layer on internal surface;
and (d) stud portion of tube.
H.M. Shalaby et al. Case Studies in Engineering Failure Analysis 9 (2017) 1–8
2
load of 500 g. The measurements were taken at 1-mm intervals along a line starting from the internal surface. The microscopic
examinations were carried out before and after etching, using optical and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Etching was made
electrolytically in 10% Oxalic acid at an applied voltage of 6 V. The corrosion products were analyzed, using energy dispersive
spectroscopy (EDS).
In order to evaluate sensitization of the tube material, and therefore, its susceptibility to intergranular corrosion, full thickness
service exposed and solution annealed crosssectional specimens were tested using the double loop electrochemical potentiokinetic
reactivation (EPR) technique. The EPR tests were made in accordance with a procedure previously reported [11,12]. The solution
annealed specimen was prepared by subjecting a specimen cut from the service exposed tube to a heat treatment at 1050 °C for 1 h
followed by water quenching to dissolve the precipitated carbides. The solution for the EPR tests consisted of 0.5-M H2SO4 and 0.01-
M KSCN. The solution was deaerated by purging with nitrogen gas for 1 h before each test, as well as during the tests, which were
conducted at room temperature. A graphite rod and saturated calomel electrode (SCE) were used as the counter and reference
electrodes, respectively. Each test was started by keeping the specimen at a cathodic potential of −600 mV vs SCE for 2 min, and
then, holding the specimen at its corrosion potential for another 2 min. The EPR plot was obtained through an anodic potential sweep
at a scan rate of 100 mV/min starting from the corrosion potential. When the potential reached a value of +300 mV, back scan at the
same rate was conducted until the open circuit potential was reached. The ratios of reactivation peak current (Ir) to activation current
peak (Ia) of the solution annealed and service exposed specimens were compared to assess the relative degree of sensitization. Both
EPR test specimens were examined using the optical microscope and SEM.
4. Results
4.1. Visual Observations
The stud tube that suffered cracking in a circumferential direction was visually examined. The crack was found to be not
associated with bulging. Thus, the appearance of the crack may suggest that cracking could have been due to stress corrosion caused
by polythionic acid or chloride and not to the creep.
The provided tube section was 89.0 cm in length and 13.83 cm in outside diameter. The internal tube surface was covered with a
deposited black layer (see Fig. 1c and d). The black layer varied considerably in thickness. The minimum thickness of the deposited
layer was ≈1.86 mm; while the maximum thickness was ≈4.61 mm (a difference of ≈2.75 mm). The maximum deposit thickness
was seen at the crack location. The tube also varied in wall thickness, and the minimum tube thickness was ≈5.92 mm; while the
maximum thickness was ≈6.96 mm. Thus, the tube suffered reduction in wall thickness of ≈1.04 mm maximum, which was mostly
at the crack location.
4.2. Microhardness Measurements
Table 1 provides the average microhardness values taken for a polished crosssection cut from the failed tube. It is clear from the
table that the microhardness is slightly higher, close to the internal and external surfaces than at the interior of the crosssection.
4.3. Analysis of Deposits
The black deposited layer found on the internal tube surface was analyzed, using XRD. It is clear from Fig. 2 that the black
deposited layer consisted of carbon (coke), iron sulphide, calcite, sodium chloride, hematite, and magnetite. It is worth mentioning
that the black deposited layer was strongly adherent to the internal metal surface. Moreover, the layer was quite dense and hard, and
thus, it was difficult to remove. A chisel was used to remove sufficient amount for XRD. Measurement of pH of the water extract of the
deposits yielded an acidic pH of 4.8.
4.4. Electrochemical Reactivation Test
The EPR curves obtained for the service exposed and the solution annealed tube material are shown in Fig. 3. Forward scanning
was shown to provide passivity at about −150 mV, as indicated by a drop in anodic current. The solution annealed specimen showed
a lower passive current compared to that obtained for the service exposed specimen, indicating that the failed tube had less tendency
Table 1
Average Microhardness Measurements along Tube Crosssection
Starting from Internal Surface.
Depth (mm) Vickers Hardness (Hv)
0–1 171
1–2 164
2–3 165
3–4 174
4–5 183
H.M. Shalaby et al. Case Studies in Engineering Failure Analysis 9 (2017) 1–8
3
towards passivation. Upon reverse scanning, reactivation peaks were formed for both specimens, but the reactivation peak current for
the service exposed tube was much higher than that of the solution annealed sample. In terms of Ir/Ia%, the service exposed sample
showed Ir/Ia% value of 4.0; whereas, the Ir/Ia% value for the solution annealed specimen was 0.07. The relatively high Ir/Ia% value
of the service exposed specimen (over 50 times) compared to that obtained for the solution annealed specimen would indicate that
the tube material suffered some degree of sensitization during its long-term service.
4.5. Microscopic Examinations and Analyses
As previously mentioned, optical and SEM examinations were conducted on the material of the failed tube, as well as, on the
specimens that underwent the electrochemical reactivation tests. Also, the alloy base metal, scale, and precipitates were analyzed
using EDS.
Fig. 4 shows optical micrographs taken for an etched crosssection cut from the tube at the crack location. Shallow grooves or pits
Fig. 2. XRD pattern of black deposited layer found on the internal tube surface.
Fig. 3. EPR curves obtained for the service exposed and the solution annealed 321 SS tube material in 0.5-M H2SO4 + 0.01-M KSCN solution.
H.M. Shalaby et al. Case Studies in Engineering Failure Analysis 9 (2017) 1–8
4
were seen along the internal tube surface underneath a thick scale layer. The grooves appeared to have developed as a result of the
separation of internal surface grains (Fig. 4a and b). Apparently, the internal surface experienced grain boundary attack to a depth of
two grains, resulting in corrosion and dropping out of surface grains. Several intergranular cracks initiated from the internal tube
surface. However, these cracks were not more than four grains in depth, except the main crack that extended across the tube wall
thickness. Linear marks of precipitations extended from both sides of the main crack for a short distance along the tube axis (see
Fig. 4a). These lines of precipitations were noticed to exist near the internal surface. Some of the grains next to the main crack walls
experienced partial or full grain boundary attack to a depth of one or two grains. This grain boundary attack was noticed to have
existed until the middle of the tube wall thickness (see Fig. 4a and c). Beyond the middle of the tube crosssection, the main crack was
not surrounded with attacked grain boundaries. The main crack had a few short branches, and the crack branches were noticed to be
intergranular starting from the internal surface until about half the wall thickness and then became transgranular up to the external
surface. Also, feathery transgranular cracks existed near the main crack close to the external surface (Fig. 4d). Subsurface grain
boundary precipitations were seen close to the external surface.
Optical microscopic examination was also done on a cross-sectional specimen cut away from the crack in order to identify the
extent and severity of damage. Once again, subsurface intercrystalline precipitation was observed up to two grains in depth at the
internal surface. Also, the internal surface was found to contain small grooves or pits and was covered with a scale layer. The extent of
grain boundary precipitation and grain separation appeared considerably less than at the failure location. The linear precipitation
close to the internal surface was less intense and much shorter when compared with those observed at the failure location. It is worth
mentioning that scattered grain boundary precipitations were seen near the external surface.
SEM examinations of a polished crosssection cut at the crack location revealed that the separation of grains, the subsurface grain
boundary penetrations, the linear marks, and the crack and its branches were associated with precipitation of a corrosion product
compound. The precipitates penetrated into the bulk of the alloy starting from the internal tube surface (Fig. 5). The precipitation
appeared similar to those resulting from high temperature reactions, such as oxidation or sulphidation.
When the crosssectional specimens that underwent the EPR tests were examined, grain boundary attack manifested by ditches
was evident for the service exposed specimen. The grain boundary attack was observed at both the external and internal surfaces,
although the depth of attack was much more at the external surface (see Fig. 6). On the other hand, the solution annealed specimen
Fig. 4. Optical micrographs of a crosssection cut at the crack location, showing (a) major crack and linear precipitations emanating from its walls close to internal
surface; (b) intergranular attack and grain separation at internal surface; (c) appearance of the main crack and branches in the mid tube section; and (d) view of the
main crack and nearby feathery cracks close to external surface (oxalic acid etch).
H.M. Shalaby et al. Case Studies in Engineering Failure Analysis 9 (2017) 1–8
5
did not suffer grain boundary attack. These results indicated that the internal and external surface layers of the heater tube had
suffered sensitization during service.
Spot EDS analyses were made on the base metal, internal surface scale, and precipitates inside the crack. As expected, the EDS
spectrum of the base metal exhibited peaks for iron (Fe), chromium (Cr), nickel (Ni), and titanium (Ti). On the other hand, EDS
analyses of the internal surface scale always provided spectra containing strong Fe and sulphur (S) peaks (Fig. 7a). When the same
analysis was made on the precipitates inside the main crack and its branches, the spectrum was most of the time similar to that of the
Fig. 5. SEM micrographs of a polished crosssection of the cracked tube, showing (a) scale buildup and corrosion products filling a crack with branches emanating from
the internal surface; (b) view of the scale-filled crack and nearby feathery cracks near external surface; and (c) and (d) penetration of boundaries of grains surrounding
the major crack near internal surface.
Fig. 6. SEM micrographs of a crosssection cut from the tube showing intergranular attack at internal surface (a) external surface (b) after EPR test in 0.5-M H2SO4 and
0.01-M KSCN solution.
H.M. Shalaby et al. Case Studies in Engineering Failure Analysis 9 (2017) 1–8
6
internal surface scale (i.e., Fe and S peaks). But, it occasionally exhibited prominent peaks of Fe, Cr, and S. The Cr peak was noticed to
be equal to that of Fe at some spots and higher than that of Fe at other spots (Fig. 7b). These results would suggest that the internal
surface scale and the precipitates inside the crack and its branches are mostly iron sulphide. However, the high Cr peak could be due
to chromium sulphide precipitations.
5. Discussion
The EPR test and the microscopic examination of the tested specimen indicated that the internal and external surface layers of the
tube material experienced grain boundary attack. Thus, the tube surfaces were in a sensitized condition, which might explain the
slight increase in hardness observed at both surfaces. As previously indicated, the failed tube was in the convection section, where the
inlet temperature is 130 °C (266°F); while the outlet temperature is 316 °C (601°F). These temperatures are far below the requirement
for the occurrence of sensitization in such a stabilized alloy. However, long-term aging and the deposition of coke and salts from the
heavy crude oil during a service that extended more than twenty years are most likely the causes of the observed sensitization.
It appeared that the precipitation of coke and salts from the heavy crude led to several events that included sensitization of the
tube surface layers and formation of grooves/pits. The presence of chlorides and acidic conditions as indicated by XRD analysis and
pH measurement of the deposits autocatalyzed the growth of pits at the internal tube surface. The pits in the sensitized internal
surface layer of the tube acted as stress risers to the initiation of chloride stress corrosion cracks. In the sensitized layer close to the
internal surface, the cracks propagated intergranularly. The precipitation of coke and salts also led to hot spot formation, which
resulted in sulphidation of the internal tube surface and the crack walls. The sulphidation of crack walls obscured the typical features
of chloride SCC near the internal surface. However, with the increase in stress concentration accompanying the crack propagation,
the crack branches became transgranular in the midsection of the tube, where the alloy was not in a sensitized condition. It is possible
that the synergistic action of chloride and H2S played a role in the initiation of stress corrosion cracks.
Fig. 7. EDS analysis of (a) internal surface scale and (b) precipitates inside the main crack.
H.M. Shalaby et al. Case Studies in Engineering Failure Analysis 9 (2017) 1–8
7
The only possible explanation for the occurrence of high temperature sulfidation is the formation of a hot spot along the length of
the tube. This view is supported by the fact that the internal tube surface was found covered with a nonuniform black deposited layer.
The thickness of the layer was ≈1.86 mm minimum and ≈4.61 mm maximum (a difference of ≈2.75 mm). The maximum deposit
thickness was seen near the failure location. In addition, the layer was very dense and hard that a chisel was used to remove sufficient
quantity for XRD. This nature of the deposited layer could be attributed to its composition, which consisted of calcite in addition to
coke, iron sulfide, sodium chloride, hematite, and magnetite.
According to ASM Handbook [13], the presence of internal surface scale or deposits causes an increase in the tube metal
temperature, because the scale or deposits have a lower thermal conductivity than the steel tube. Such temperature increase can lead
to creep and accelerated oxidation in addition to other failure mechanisms. It would appear that in the present case, the increase in
metal temperature did not lead to creep, but caused sensitization and high temperature sulphidation. It has been suggested [13] that
for austenitic iron-based high temperature alloys, elevated temperature behavior, such as creep, begins at 0.49Tm (700 °C), where Tm
is the melting temperature. Thus, it would seem that the tube was exposed to temperatures greater than 260 °C, but less than 700 °C.
Refinery furnace tubes are usually fabricated from several grades of steels for elevated temperature applications, mainly ferritic,
i.e., carbon steels, carbon-molybdenum (C-Mo) steels, and Cr-Mo steels. The materials are selected for their stress rupture or creep
rupture properties combined with corrosion resistance [14,15]. SSs are sometimes used as furnace tubes for highly corrosive feeds.
SSs are preferred over high nickel alloys, because nickel is prone to form low melting nickel-nickel sulphide eutectic. Over the service
time, the tubes are subjected to several degradation phenomena that may cause operational problems. Damage to the inside surface of
the tube results from the aggressive action of the feed. The principal corrosive impurities in crude oils are sulphur compounds and
chlorides [16]. In the present case, chlorides led to SCC, while sulphidic corrosion caused by the sulphur compounds resulted in
localized sulphide scale formation on the crack walls and along grain boundaries.
As previously mentioned, heavy crude oils rich in salts, sulphur and H2S were the charge since commissioning over twenty years
ago. This might explain the presence of calcite as part of the scale and the occurrence of the failure in the convection section where
the operating temperature is suitable for the precipitation of calcite. Although minor sulphidation existed along the length of the
internal tube surface; albeit, it was more intense at the failure location where more salt precipitation occurred. It can be safely
assumed that the nature of the crude was the catalytic factor for the occurrence of SCC and the sulphidation of the internal surface
and crack walls.
The presence of hematite and magnetite within the scale suggests their formation during decoking operations carried out by
means of steam or that the crude oil still contained residual water. The latter assumption appears to be the correct one since not only
calcite was precipitated on the internal tube surface, but also sodium chloride. Because metal sulphides form at faster rates than do
metal oxides, much more sulphides were observed in the present failure than oxides. Thus, it was advised that the performance of the
desalter be improved and frequent decoking and scale removal be carried out, with emphasis on the convection section.
6. Conclusions
• The charge heater tube suffered from chloride SCC. The chloride SCC initiated in the sensitized internal surface layer as
intergranular cracks.
• The precipitation of salts from the crude increased the metal temperature in the convection section of the heater, leading to
sensitization of the material and the high temperature sulphidation. Sulphidation of crack walls obscured the chloride SCC
features at some locations.
• The utilization of heavy crude oil rich in salts, sulphur, and H2S may have been the catalytic factor. Thus, the problem is related to
the type of feed used.