Abstract
This is a case study regarding frequent forced outages in an oil-fired power generating station due to failure of fire resistant fluid (FRF) piping of material ASTM A-304. This analysis was done to find out the most probable cause of failure and to rectify the problem. Methods for finding and analyzing the cracks include nondestructive testing techniques such as visual testing (VT) and dye penetrant testing (PT) along with that periodic monitoring after rectification of problem. The study revealed that pitting and pit to crack transitions were formed in stainless steel piping containing high pressure (system pressure 115 bars) fire resistant fluid. However, after replacement of piping the pitting and cracking reoccurred. It was observed that due to possible exposure to chlorinated moisture in surrounding environment pitting was formed which then transformed into cracks. The research work discussed in this paper illustrates the procedure used in detection of the problem and measures taken to solve the problem.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
1. Introduction
Hydraulic control system is the most widely used system due to massive fluid power but for the purpose of transmission of fluid from one point to the other a structure is needed which of course is piping structure. Use of piping as a mode of transportation is safe and economical [1], [2], [3], [4]. In this study of pitting and crack formation in the fire resistant fluid piping of a typical oil-fired thermal power generation plant, detection of pitting and cracking investigation regarding probable causes of the problem is discussed.
2. Background
Frequent failures of hydraulic control system were faced by the operational team and bear unaccepted forced outages and eventually the financial loss. At the event of each shutdown the tracing of leaky areas and repair/replacement required on urgent bases to accomplish the minimum breakdown time. This costly and tiring activity was repeated after a while until this root-cause investigation was done. This paper presents the steps involved in root cause investigation for probable failure of stainless steel pipe lines used for FRF hydraulic control and suggested rectification method and post rectification status of the problem.
3. Methodology
Three major aspects involved in investigations were: (1) Background information and historical data of failure, which involves the design and construction of pipelines and the historical failure data helped in understanding the formation of cracks. (2) Classical nondestructive testing especially visual and dye penetrant testing for identification of the location and evaluating the cracks. (3) Environmental changes and correlation of power plant norm with the failure which involved in identifying the source of chlorinated mist.
4. Findings & discussion
4.1. Information from background information and historical data of failure
The first FRF failure was occurred in the year 2011 (after thirteen years of plant operation) which included pitting and cracks. Initially no case study was done for root cause analysis. In 2014 structural study and thorough inspection was performed by the Qualtech NDE NDT team, the findings revealed that firstly corrosive moisture droplets (Fig. 1) settled on the piping especially on top of horizontally laid piping. Then the pitting (Fig. 2) and cracking (Fig. 3) started in the high pressure SS-304 piping with a diameter of 45 mm and having thickness of 3 mm.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (177KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Inspection Photograph.

Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (368KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Inspection Photograph.

Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (283KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Inspection Photograph.

The Sketch 1 showing complete FRF piping system, which was divided into sections for easy identification of different areas according to floor levels. The inspection team could easily mark the location of repair areas for rectification and records.
Sketch 1
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Sketch 1. Inspection Photograph.

4.2. Visual testing
Visual inspection performed according to ASME Section-V Article-9. It was observed that surface of piping have clusters of pitting which was the reason of crack formation as pit to crack transition. Oil seepage also noted from pits and cracks as shown in Fig. 4. For detailed inspection a piece of cracked piping was cut and cross-sectional view shown in Fig. 5. The dimension of the following piece is 25 mm in length with a Diameter of 45 mm and having Thickness of 3 mm.
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (195KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Inspection Photograph.

Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (175KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Inspection Photograph.

4.3. Dye penetrant testing
Dye penetrant inspection performed according to ASME Section-V Article-6. The each and every section of piping and welds performed in order to find out any surface pitting and shallow cracks other than those locations from where oil seepage was observed (Fig. 6). The FRF seepage areas were inspected in such a manner that only a thin layer of developer was applied so that the FRF entrapped in the leaky pitting or cracks bleed out and visualized on surface of developer (Fig. 7).
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (187KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Inspection Photograph.

Fig. 7
Download: Download high-res image (160KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Inspection Photograph.

Once the penetrant and developer is applied minor pitting was observed in other various locations of the pipe as shown in Fig. 8 of Section 5 picture taken in year 2014.
Fig. 8
Download: Download high-res image (204KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Inspection Photograph.

4.4. Environmental effect
Stainless steel is prone to corrosion and pitting when excessive chlorine is found in environment studies related to stress corrosion cracking (SCC) [6]. In presence of chlorine produces cracks and upon further investigation through scanning electron micrographs (SEM) and EDX profile confirmed the development of cracks from outside of the pipeline due to chlorinated environment [5]. Upon investigation it was observed that power plant operation engineers used chlorine to remove the sea-weed while water intake which created an environment containing mist of chlorine. That is why pitting and crack were mostly observed on top 12 O’ clock position of the pipeline because most exposed & mist dust settled area of the pipeline was the upper side of horizontally laid piping.
5. Conclusion and recommendation
In order to prevent chlorine contamination on the surface of the pipelines it was recommended by NDT Inspection Company to the power plant engineers to cover the pipelines with thick and even coating of some suitable epoxy after cleaning the pipelines properly (In this case the “Amine Cured Epoxy universal type by Akozonoble” was applied and found very good results).
After cleaning and applying coating on the pipelines the power plant forced outages very much controlled due to FRF leakage in hydraulic control system. Now periodic monitoring and maintenance of coating is strictly followed to avoid this type of hectic outages.
6. Post-rectification
Following (Fig. 9, Fig. 10) taken in year 2016 showing condition after applying the thick coat of Amine Cured Epoxy to prevent the surface of pipeline from exposure of chlorinated mist. As no FRF seepage can be observed, periodic visual monitoring of coating integrity is recommended.