International Space Station (LSS) materials and processes engineering personnel submitted a payload canister rail
from the Rotation Handling Fixture when a crack was observed on the top of the rail during installation. The
Rotation Handling Fixture is used to lift the modules of the ISS into a vacuum chamber in order to perform leak
checks. The drawing specified that the rail be
composed of AISI 4140 steel (UNS G41400).
Fig. J shows the payload canister rail, as received.
The blue arrows indicate the six notches that are
cut into the top of the rail in order to fit a thrust
block assembly used to secure the payload to the
rail. The yellow arrow indicates the location of
the crack (inset). Two apparent weld repairs were
observed in the locations indicated by the red
arrows. The distance between the weld repair
regions and their closest notches was
approximately equal to the distant between
adjacent notches, which is equal to 10 cm. The
rail was sectioned longitudinally in order to
remove the top ledge from the base of the rail so
that examination of the underside of the ledge
could be performed. Four cracked regions were
Figure 1. Payload canister rail, as received, with an
inset image of the crack on the top of the rail. Scales are
in cm increments.
observed on the underside of the ledge near the weld repair regions.
The crack was opened using an Instron tensile tester in a three-point bend loading configuration in order to
examine the fracture surface. Corrosion product covered the majority of the revealed surfaces, as shown in Fig. 2.
The corrosion product was removed in order to reveal the features on the surface. The surfaces were flat and only
IIh_lu(:eJ Irad ll lt:
had a small region of fracture around the edge of
the surface that was approximately I to 2 mm wide.
Plating was observed on one of the revealed
surfaces (Fig. 2, bottom right). The other surface
displayed tools marks that appeared to be the result
of a machining and grinding operation (Fig. 2, top
right).
Analysis of the fracture surface via scanning
electron microscope (SEM) revealed tool marks on
both of the surfaces. Examination of the fracture
region around the edge of both of the surfaces
revealed dimples formed by microvoid coalescence
(MVC), characteristic of ductile stress overload.
Analysis of the bulk metal surface with
qualitative/semi-quantitative energy dispersive
spectroscopy via the SEM (SEM/EDS) confirmed
the presence of nickel plating on one of the
revealed surfaces.
Metallographic specimens were prepared from Figure 2. Stereomicroscope images of the revealed
service fracture. cross sections of the un fractured weld repair
region. Initial observation of the metallographic specimens after etching indicated that a piece of different material
was welded into a notch cut in the base material and that the weld had penetrated less than 3 mm, as shown in Fig. 3.
The size of the notch correlated with the size of the machined notches that were located in six positions on the rail in
order to install the thrust block. On the underside of the rail ledge, the weld did not fuse the fill piece with the base
metal.
2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
Metallographic specimens were also prepared from cross-sections of the fractured weld region. Macroscopic
examination of the metallographic specimens indicated that cold-work lines parallel to the fracture surface were
present on the fill material, which would
indicate that the bar was cut from a larger plate
of material and the material was inserted such
that the transverse cross-section was sustaining
the load. Metallographic analysis of the
samples confirmed the stereomicroscope and
SEM findings that plating was present on the
bulk metal surface and the fracture surface was
limited to a small region on the edge of the
specimen. The weld used to hold the piece of
fill materials in the notch also had significant
porosity.
Microscopic examination of the bulk metal
metallographic specimen indicated that the base
microstructure was ferrite and pearlite
dendrites. The heat-affected zone (HAZ) had a
progressive microstructure of ferrite and
Figure 3. Cross-sections of the weld repair region
showing a piece of metal inserted into the rail (left) with
an incomplete weld around the edge (right, arrow).
untempered martensite and plate martensite showing the prior austenite grain boundaries. The fusion zone structure
was ferrite with martensite/austenite/carbides (MAC). The microstructures found in the bulk metal were typical for
a 4140 steel weld.
Microscopic examination of the fill material metallographic specimens revealed that the base microstructure was
coarse grain ferrite and pearlite. The HAZ had a progressive microstructure of spheroidized pearlite in ferrite, ferrite
and martensite in refined prior austenite grain boundaries, and ferrite and martensite in coarse prior austenite grain
boundaries. The fusion zone structure was ferrite with MAC. The microstructures found in the fill material were
typical for welded plain carbon steel.
Microhardness measurements were taken on the metallographic specimens prepared from the cross-sections of
the fracture surface and were converted3 to the Rockwell B scale (HRB). The converted hardness of the bulk metal
averaged 92 HRB. The converted hardness of the fill metal averaged 82 HRB, which is significantly less than the
hardness of the bulk rail metal. The hardness of the bulk metal from the rail met the drawing requirements;
however, the hardness of the fill metal was less than the required hardness of the rail.
Chemical analysis determined that the bulk metal was AIS) 4140 steel (UNS G41400), which was in accordance
with the drawing. The fill material was determined to likely be a 1000-series steel and most closely matched AISI
1030 steel (UNS G 1 0300).
The payload canister rail failed due to improper fabrication techniques. The rail had two cut notches that were
not in accordance with the drawing, and thereby were filled with a low-strength, 1000-series steel. The grinding
marks on the fill material surface indicate that the cut piece of materials was ground in order to fit into the miscut
notch. The weld around the steel bar that was used to fill the slot did not have adequate penetration to fuse the fill
material with the bulk rail metal. The lack of fusion was the most pronounced on the underside of the rail and acted
as crack initiation points. The rail subsequently failed due to stress overload. 