During installation of the new launch pad lightning protection towers for the Constellation program, inspectors
found toe cracks along a total of nine
welds on all three of the towers at 101·11 . 3-in. level
various elevations. Cracking occurred
along one third or less of the perimeter
of each weld between the 10-in.
diameter main horizontal pipe joining
two 8-in. diameter bracing pipes,
which are shown in Fig. 8. A
representative coupon sample was
removed from one of the towers at the
10 I-ft, 3-in. elevation crack area for
analysis. Temperature measurements
were taken during cutting operations
to ensure that the part was not overheated such that no microstructural
101·ft. 3·in. levol
38-ft. 9·in. level ,-
Figure 8. Images of the partially assembled lightning towers at the
launch pad.
changes were induced. The pipes were specified as ASTM A 500 Grade B carbon steel. Photodocumentation,
stereomicroscopy, SEM analysis, chemical analysis and metallography were performed on three specimens created
from the removed coupon to determine the cause of weld toe cracking.
After initial photodocumentation, a sectioning plan was formulated to create cross-sectional samples for
stereomicroscopy, metallography, fractography, and chemical analysis. During sectioning of Specimen I shown in
Fig. 9, the through-crack was exposed to reveal corrosion product on the fracture surface. Specimen 2, which was
opened during analysis creating a laboratory-induced overload region, revealed that the crack surface extended to
the inner diameter (lD) of the 10-in. pipe and tapered off, as illustrated in Fig. 9, bottom right. No paint was
6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
observed on the fracture surface, indicating that the crack had initiated after painting and had propagated to its full
extent before the coupon was taken, with enough time to allow corrosion product to form.
The fracture surfaces of Specimen I
were evaluated via SEM at higher
magnifications as part of a fractographic
analysis. Each surface was ultrasonically Cldck
cleaned to remove the majority of the
corrosion product that had formed on the
surface. The fracture surface near the IO-in. 10·in. di • . pipe
pipe outer diameter (00) contained both
intergranular and transgranular crack
propagation features with evidence of brittle
and ductile (mixed-mode) fracture.
Intergranular (IG) crack propagation regions
were surrounded by regions of transgranular
crack growth. Microvoid coalescence
(MVC), indicative of ductile stress overload,
was observed near the ID of the pipe.
Further evaluation was performed on the
Specimen 2 fracture surface, which
exhibited crack propagation demarcations.
It was determined that the demarcations
10·in. pipe 00 f-----':.:...::..::.:...c:---'-----"', ]-:;~:::;;;;;;:;;;;;:;;;;'i 10·in. pipe 00
Laboratory"
10·in. pipe 10 ::::=====--__ ---' ~~~~:..:.:::J 10. in pipe 10
10mm
Figure 9. Removed coupon, as received (top), showing the
location of the two samples that were opened for
fractographic analysis (bottom images).
were not beach marks typically associated with progressive crack growth during fatigue; rather the marks were due
to superficial corrosion product build-up on the fracture surface. The secondary electron (SE) image did not show
fatigue striations or plastic transgranular deformation normally observed around the site of a beach mark. At higher
magnification, SE analysis appeared to show a slight change in fracture features from IG to MVC. Additionally, the
backscatter electron (BSE) image exhibited atomic contrast due to the presence of corrosion product forming the
curved lines (darker regions) which was verified by energy dispersive spectroscopy (EOS). It is expected that this
crack
imtlation weld bead
Heat Affe<ted
lone/HAl)
base metal
(ASTMA500.
Grade B)
Figure 10. Micrographs of the cross-section of the weld
showing the crack at the toe of the weld.
failure was due to overload with a
geometrical stress state constraint, which
prevented the material to plastically deform
resulting in a mixed-mode fracture with a
large percentage of brittle fracture features.
According to the ASM Handbook, Vol. 12,
"when a change in the fracture mode does
occur as a result of a triaxial state of stress ...
the mode of rupture can change from the
normal dimple rupture to quasi-cleavage or
intergranular decohesion.,,7
A third specimen was extracted and a
cross section was mounted, polished, and
etched to reveal the weld bead, heat affected
zone, and base metal microstructure.
Metallography showed the crack initiating
near the toe of the IO-in. pipe weld at the joint
transition where a stress concentration was
expected due to weld geometry, as shown in
the left image of Fig. 10. The crack propagated mostly perpendicular to the weld near through-thickness and
deviated at a 45° angle I mm from the lD of the IO-in. pipe, as shown in the right image of Fig. 10. The cross
section exhibited acceptable microstructures for the heat-affected zone (HAZ), weld metal, and base metal as
expected for a plain carbon steel fillet weld. Microstructure and crack morphology indicated that this failure was
neither due to hydrogen-induced cracking nor other types of materials-related fracture.
Chemical analysis via optical emission spectroscopy indicated that the average carbon content for both the 8-in.
pipe and the IO-in. pipe met the specification8 and that the chemistry of the pipes was nominal. Microhardness
measurements using a Knoop indenter were converted3 to the Rockwell B scale (HRB). The converted hardness
values indicated that the mechanical properties of the pipes were within the specification8
.
7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
The crack profile and fractography indicated that the joint failed due to stress overload. The lack of paint on the
fracture surface indicated that the crack occurred after painting. Heavier oxidation on the fracture near the 10-in.
pipe ID, rather than the origin at the 00, indicates that moisture had wicked into the fracture and settled over time.
Weld features and geometry appeared nominal. No weld discontinuities or defects were observed. Fracture
initiated at a transition near the toe of the weld, a region of stress concentration, and propagated inward through the
base metal rather than following the weld HAZ. Microstructure, hardness, and fracture features did not indicate a
hydrogen-induced failure mechanism. No other failure mechanisms related to the material were observed.
Loading configuration of this joint design should be evaluated to determine if the joint was overloaded, with the
weld toe considered to be a significant point of stress concentration. Future assembly operations should eliminate
the possibility of stress overload during fit-up and existing cracks should be repaired.
The reasoning behind the categorization of this failure is more due to the lessons learned from this failure. After
completion, the lightning towers stand 500 feet tall with 100 foot high fiberglass masts. The only access to the
lightning tower is with a rung ladder on one side of each tower, with four walkways approximately every 125 feet.
Routine inspection and maintenance of the towers and the welds, along with troubleshooting of any problems that
may arise, will be difficult with the current access configuration, which should be taken into account at the
beginning of a new long-term program. 