1. Introduction
Dissimilar welds occur in applications when different materials are combined to improve product performance. A typical example is the use of ferritic and austenitic stainless steels in power plant applications, which can be traced back to the 1940s [1]. Other examples which started later, are the use of ferritic and duplex stainless steels in applications that take advantage of the improved mechanical and corrosion properties of duplex stainless steels [2], [3]. However, due to their complexity, dissimilar welds can be susceptible to unanticipated failures. The present case study documents the failure of a duplex and carbon steel weld.
The heat exchanger experienced partial cracking of the circumferential V-groove weld joining the carbon steel shell (SA-106 pipe) and 2205 duplex stainless steel tubesheet (SA-182-F51/F60). The filler metal used for the weld is AWS A5.9 ER2209. The failure occurred within a few hours of being placed into service. The crack was identified as H2S was being introduced into the heat exchanger. The procedure used subjected the vessel to an ambient temperature H2S line running at nearly atmospheric pressure without any heat load. Pressure was being equalized through the H2S system. Prior to this operation, the heat exchanger was successfully pressure tested using N2. The exchanger was rated for a maximum allowable working pressure of 550 psi at 330 °F.
The duplex stainless steel tubesheet was selected to mitigate pitting corrosion of the 316L stainless steel tubes and tubesheet of the previous exchanger. Duplex has a higher pitting resistance than 316L [3]. The use of the carbon steel shell was primarily for cost savings. A section of the weld containing the crack was extracted from the heat exchanger to conduct this failure analysis.
2. Visual damage assessment
The as received sample extracted from the heat exchanger for this analysis, exposed crack fracture surfaces after sectioning, and illustration of crack location are shown in Fig. 1. The through thickness crack extended approximately 5 in. circumferentially near the top side of the exchanger. The crack initiated and propagated mostly along the weld metal side of the fusion line with the carbon steel except near the OD, where it propagated into the weld metal away from the fusion line. The discoloration seen in Fig. 1(b) appears to be consequential oxidation after the failure, especially on the carbon steel side of the fracture surface. Note that at this location, the weld was approximately 0.1″ thinner than the rest of the weld. No evidence of initial weld defects such as incomplete fusion and lack of penetration were observed.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Circumferential crack in the dissimilar metal weld: (a) as received sample extracted for failure analysis (∼8-in. long, 1.75-in. wide, and 0.5-in. thick); (b) exposed crack fracture surfaces after sectioning; (c) illustration of crack location.

3. Metallography and hardness
Microhardness profiles across the dissimilar weld and carbon base metal were conducted. Fig. 2 shows the locations where hardness measurements were taken across the weld with and without the crack. The heat affected zone as well as the weld passes can also be observed. The hardness profile along the weld and carbon steel side can be seen in Fig. 3. The weld had a hardness of ∼275 HV (∼26.3 HRC) compared to carbon steel with a hardness of ∼175 HV (4.5 HRC). Table 1 show the microhardness measurements along the crack line and fusion line (un-cracked). Note the hardness on the weld side of the crack/fusion line can be as high as 340 HV and 249 HV on the carbon steel side. The microstructure of the base metals and filler weld can be seen in Fig. 4. The duplex stainless steel shows the typical austenite-ferrite phases. The weld is dendritic, and the carbon steel has a banded ferrite-pearlite microstructure except for the HAZ where it is martensitic.
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (998KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Hardness profile locations: (a) across dissimilar weld and along crack from ID to OD; (b) along fusion line in un-cracked weld from ID to OD.

Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (233KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Hardness profile along weld and carbon steel base metal − horizontal hardness locations in Fig. 2 (a).

Table 1. Microhardness profiles along the crack and fusion line.

Location	Microhardness (HV)
Empty Cell	Along the crack moving from ID to OD at ∼0.5 mm intervals	Along the fusion line moving from ID to OD at ∼ 0.1 mm intervals
Empty Cell	Filler Material 2209	Carbon Steel	Filler Material 2209	Carbon Steel
1	277	220	282	215
2	287	236	285	232
3	276	216	336	212
4	270	215	320	213
5	274	210	270	191
6	272	203	265	196
7	274	196	290	209
8	269	216	266	213
9	260	249	340	207
10	299	270	301	224
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (2MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Microstructure of dissimilar weld: (a) austenite and ferrite duplex stainless steel; (b) dendritic weld microstructure; (c) banded ferrite-pearlite carbon steel; (d) martensite on HAZ of carbon steel.

4. SEM-EDS fractography
The fracture surface of the dissimilar weld was observed under a scanning electron microscope (SEM) coupled with an energy dispersive spectroscopy system (EDS) to identify the failure mechanisms. As shown in Fig. 5, SEM observations near the OD revealed the crack propagated in a brittle mode through the dendritic weld microstructure. A cleavage-like appearance can be clearly seen in Fig. 5 (a). On the other hand, as shown in Fig. 6, the fracture surface near the ID edge depicted intergranular features where the crack propagates along grain boundaries. This intergranular nature of fracture surface appears to have extended up to ∼1 mm from the ID moving towards the OD direction and occurred on the carbon steel side of the fusion line. EDS analysis results of the intergranular region near the ID, given in Fig. 7, reveals a relatively diluted alloyed chemistry (lower Cr and Ni content) compared to the 2209 filler. Note that no sulfur was detected.
Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Fracture surface near OD along dendritic microstructure: (a) across weld metal; (b) crack near fusion line.

Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Fracture surface near ID showing intergranular fracture: (a) at 1000 X; (b) 1800X.

Fig 7
Download: Download high-res image (560KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig 7. EDS Analysis of intergranular fracture surface.

5. Discussion
The heat exchanger weld failure is primarily associated with sulfide-assisted stress corrosion cracking, facilitated by high weld hardness levels. SEM fractography of a region near the ID revealed an intergranular fracture, typical of sulfide-assisted stress corrosion cracking at the microscopic level. The failure occurred in 3 to 4 h when the unit was being introduced to H2S vapor. Under sulfide-assisted stress corrosion cracking conditions, especially in the presence of water and at ambient temperatures [4], hydrogen embrittlement leads to failures. These failures can occur very rapidly and at relatively low stresses. This failure suggests water was likely present in the system. The crack initiated at the ID under sulfide-assisted stress corrosion attack and propagated towards the OD direction. The crack also propagated circumferentially since it is driven by longitudinal stresses as well. It appears that the crack initiated near the fusion line on the carbon steel side but then it mostly propagated into the weld metal along the fusion line until the very end, where it cracked away from the fusion line. The intergranular fracture appearance of this weld is similar to that observed on the failure of an Alloy A52 to A508 dissimilar weld subjected to stress corrosion cracking conditions [5].
Hardness levels in the weld region are on average 296 HV on the filler side and 211 HV on the carbon steel side. The hardness levels on the carbon steel side are higher than those recommended for carbon steel welds (≦200 HBW) in sulfur environments according to NACE Standard Practice SP0472-2010 [6]. Hardness levels in the 2209 filler (Table 1), a duplex stainless steel material, also exceed the weld microhardness requirement that no one hardness reading shall be over 320 HV per NACE Standard Material Requirement MR0103-2007 [7] for this type of material. Finally, if one considers that the relatively diluted alloy chemistry on the fracture surface resembles a 400 series martensitic stainless steel (Fig. 7), this region exceeds the microhardness requirement of 22 HRC (∼248 HV) for a martensitic stainless steel weld overlay in Section 2.4.3 of NACE MR0103-2007 [6] (see microhardness values on duplex stainless steel weld metal side in Table 1).
While the EDS analysis of the fracture surface, especially where intergranular failure was detected, did not reveal any sulfur which sometimes can be found in sulfide-assisted stress corrosion cracking failures, it is possible that its presence is being overshadowed by the Mo content of the 2209 filler metal. EDS is limited in its ability to differentiate between Mo and S at low concentrations, since both have very similar EDS peaks.
Other likely factors that facilitated the cracking of the weld are: (1) steep hardness change between the two adjoining materials and (2) tensile residual stresses generated during welding. Differences in the thermal expansion coefficient between the carbon steel shell and duplex stainless steel tubesheet and filler metal, did not play a role in the failure since it occurred when the exchanger was at ambient temperature (no head load). Finally, since the heat exchanger was successfully pressure tested with N2 prior the failure event, any mechanical design factors or fabrication defects can be ruled out as root causes or contributing factors to the failure.
6. Conclusion
Based on the failure analysis conducted, the heat exchanger weld failure was associated with sulfide-assisted stress corrosion cracking facilitated by high weld hardness levels and local dilution of chemistry in the weld. Since these hardness levels, local dilution of chemistry plus weld residual stresses are difficult to control in dissimilar welds like this one, probably the best protection against this type of failure is to ensure the H2S process environment does not contain any water or water vapor.