Abstract
Cause of failure of two adjacent super heater tubes made of Cr-Mo steel of a coal based 60 MW thermal power plant has been portrayed in present investigation. Oxide deposits were found on internal surface of tubes. Deposits created significant resistance to heat transfer and resulted in undesirable rise in component temperature. This situation, in turn, aggravated the condition of gas side that was exposed to high temperature. Localized heating coarsened carbides as well as propelled precipitation of new brittle phases along grain boundary resulting in embrittlement of tube material. Continuous exposure to high temperature softened the tube material and tube wall was thinned down with bulging toward outside. Creep void formation along grain boundary was observed and steered intergranular cracking. All these effects contributed synergistically and tubes were failed ultimately due to overload under high Hoop stress.
Graphical abstract

Download: Download high-res image (224KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Failure analysisBoiler tubeOxidationCorrosionCreep
1. Introduction
For any power plant, it is prime importance to generate electricity without forced outages. Failure of super heater tube of boiler is the major concern of forced outages at coal fired thermal power plant. Flue gas passes over super heater tubes leading to damage over the time of operation and termed as fireside damage/corrosion. Again the extent of damage is dependent on quality of coal, materials used, operation and maintenance. Interior of these tubes are also vulnerable and primarily dependent on quality of water used for generating high pressure steam. Continuous/steady flow of steam through these tubes is necessary to maintain tube materials under prescribed temperature. Otherwise, there is a possibility of shoot-up of temperature causing fast detoriation of materials and subsequent failure. In that case overall efficiency of the plant is dropped. Therefore, the study of tube failure and finding the solution is needed to avoid such incident in future.
Boiler tubes of a coal fired plant faced harsh environment all the way from inside steam to outside flue gases. Tubes are exposed to temperature in the range of 540–1000 °C, varying along length of tubes i.e. from base toward elevation. According to service condition, outside of tubes are exposed to high temperature. High pressure steam flows through inside and is discharged at a temperature of >500 °C depending on nature and capacity of plant. Temperature shoot up above specification is most common reason of failure for boiler tubes [1]. The reason is either scale formation on internal and/or external surfaces under prolong exposure at elevated temperature or non-uniform steam flow through partially blocked tubes [2]. Internal scale formation reduces heat transfer rate across tube wall. Moreover, scale formation causes non-linear (non-uniform) heating, resulting in the retardation of heat transfer further and reduction of thermal efficiency. External oxide formation generally depends on type/quality of coal, which produces flue gas. Mostly complex alkali sulfate scales are formed. This effect raises the temperature of tube locally and longtime exposure results in thicker oxide formation, subsequent exclusion of the same. The later phenomenon escalates wall thinning and rupture of the tube. Material de-generation and subsequent failure due to thermal fluctuation, have been studied by a number of investigators in recent past [3], [4].
It is to be noted, that in many cases a thin protective Fe3O4 layer is deposited on waterside of tubes. Protectiveness of this thin layer depends on pH level and degree of contamination of water. There are many failure mechanisms that have been reported depending upon the presence of contamination with flowing steam. These are primarily related with caustic corrosion, hydrogen damage or pitting [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12].
This paper presents the analysis of failure of two adjacent super heater tubes in a coal based 60 MW power plant. Inside steam pressure was at 100 kg/cm2. Within short span of time in the end zone of the super heater tubes three failures were reported. The incident happened with the component commissioned in 1988 and last overhauled in 2015. After routine maintenance, the system was operated for nearly four months and then first failure occurred. Subsequently, second failure was reported after 10 days and third one took place after 2 months. During entire operation period only schedule outages were made. Location of the failed region was close vicinity of top end of the tubes and very near to boiler drum where the flu gas temperature was ∼900 °C.
Two failed pieces of tubes made of Cr–Mo steel were chosen for this investigation. Sample-A (tube A) exhibited fish mouth cracking at one side and bulging at opposite side. Layer wise corrosion was observed near open end of crack and over remaining wall. Inner surface contained multiple cracks along longitudinal direction whereas the same was completely absent at outer surface. Sample-B (Tube B), also contained fish mouth cracking at one part of the tube. Inner side of the pipe was covered with loosely attached brownish substance. Excessive wall thinning was found close to failure. With respect to total designated service life, both the components failed after covering nearly ¾th of the same. To prevent such undesirable incident in future, the investigation was taken up to find out cause of failure and subsequently providing tentative remedial measure.
2. Experimental
Failed boiler tubes were visually examined to reveal the nature of fracture. Tubes were cut along cross section to study the appearance of inner wall. Samples were collected from different locations for investigation as indicated in Fig. 1. The marked locations with sample ID are collated in Table 1.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (657KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Macro image and sampling location from damaged tube A (a) cracking over surface (b) bulged region, (c) Inner surface of tube, (d) inner surface of bulged region and (e) schematic presentation of tube assembly with marked location of failure.

Table 1. Sampling location from fracture component and its nomenclature.

Tube ID	Sample ID	Location
Sample-A	Sample-A1	Away from fracture
Sample-A2	Sub-surface of fracture
Sample-A3	Near bulging
Sample-A4	Near Fracture (Across thickness)

Sample-B	Sample-B1	Away from fracture
Sample-B2	Sub-surface of fracture
Sample-B3	Near Fracture (Across thickness)
Samples- A1 to A4 and B1 to B3 were considered for metallographic examination. They were mounted, polished by conventional technique, etched with 3% Nital and examined in optical (Leica DM 2500 M, USA) and scanning electron (JEOL JSM 840A, JAPAN) microscopes. Fracture surfaces were cleaned using dilute EDTA solution followed by Kerosene oil and finally in Acetone by sonication. The samples were studied in SEM. Bulk composition of alloy was determined in ICP and LECO using chips, obtained from cleaned surface. Bulk hardness was evaluated near fracture and bulging zone in Brinell Scale using steel ball as indenter. Some amount of adhered corrosion products was collected and examined by X-ray diffraction technique to identify their nature. The investigation and corresponding inferences are described in the following sub-sections.
3. Results & discussions
3.1. Visual examination
The damaged tubes were observed in reflected light with naked eyes (Fig. 1 and 2). Two tubes were designated as Sample-A and sample-B. Both tubes experienced temperature in range of ∼540 °C with stress level 100 kg/cm2 during operation. Sample-A exhibited fish mouth cracking at one side (Fig. 1a) and bulging at opposite side of weld (Fig. 1b). Cut length of the tube was 400 mm and wall thickness of un-deformed region was ∼5.80 mm with ∼36.8 mm outer diameter. From weld seam the distance of cracking was ∼40 mm and total crack length was ∼50 mm with ∼6.7 mm maximum opening. Layer wise corrosion was observed near open end of crack and the remaining wall thickness was reduced drastically (<1 mm). Inner surface contained multiple crack formation along longitudinal direction (Fig. 1c) whereas the same was completely absent at outer surface. Outer surface was blackened owing to thermal effect (Fig. 1a) and the inside surface was deep brown with numerous reddish spots (Fig. 1c).
As mentioned above, bulging was observed at lower half of the same tube. After bulging outer diameter became ∼42.0 mm with distance of deformation ∼12 cm from weld seam. Thick scale was loosely adhered to the inner surface near bulging (Fig. 1d).
Sample-B, also contained fish mouth cracking at one part of tube and other part exhibited no such de-generation. Total length of cut portion of tube was ∼250 mm, wall thickness was ∼6.2 mm with outer diameter ∼39.0 mm. Crack was adjacent to weld seam with length ∼30 mm and maximum crack opening ∼2.8 mm. Both inner and outer surface contained longitudinal cracking of variable length (Fig. 2a and b). Inner side of the pipe was loosely covered with fine brown whiskers, which were product of oxidation corrosion (Fig. 2b). Fracture surface was dull in appearance. The area contained layered brown structure due to oxidation corrosion owing to its exposure to air after failure (Fig. 2a). Excessive thinning was found at the close vicinity of failure.
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (432KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Macro image and sampling location from damaged tube B (a) cracking over surface and (b) appearance of inner surface.

3.2. Chemical composition
The concentration of alloying elements in alloy has been collated in Table 2. The chemical composition of bulk specimen confirmed Polish composition of Steel 10H2M, which was equivalent to DIN 10CrMo9-10 or T22. There was no difference in chemical composition of the failed tubes with respect to standard specification.
Table 2. Bulk chemical composition of component.

Alloy	Element in wt%
Empty Cell	C	Si	Mn	Cr	Mo	S (max)	P (max)	Fe	Ni/Cu (max)
Steel 10H2M	0.08–0.15	0.15–0.30	0.3–0.6	2.0–2.5	0.9–1.1	0.03	0.03	bal	0.30
Din 10 CrMo9-10	0.08–0.14	0.5 max	0.4–0.8	2.0–2.5	0.9–1.1	0.01	0.02	bal	0.30
T22	0.05–0.15	0.5 max	0.3–0.6	1.9–2.6	0.87–1.13	0.025	0.025	bal	NI
Sample A	0.14	0.27	0.41	2.25	0.99	0.02	0.02	bal	N/F
Sample B	0.13	0.32	0.47	2.10	1.03	0.02	0.02	bal	N/F
*N/F – not found, NI – not indicated.
3.3. Microstructural examination
The optical microstructures of damaged components are shown in Fig. 3 and consisted of pre-dominantly polygonal ferrite. Close to grain boundary, dark voids were observed. This was an indication of creep. Couple of globular/elliptical/near-globular diffused shaded islands of variable size was also found. These were globular carbides occurred due to spherodisation under high temperature exposure. With respect to un-deformed grain geometry (Figs. 3a and d), grain shape near fracture (Figs. 3b and e) exhibited slight increment in aspect ratio with loss of angularity. This envisaged material flow under stress at elevated temperature leading to bulging and subsequent wall thinning.
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Optical microstructure of transverse section of damaged tubes (a) sample A1, (b) sample A2, (c) sample A3, (d) sample B1 and (e) sample B2. All samples exhibited ferrite matrix containing large voids, spherodisation and coalescence of carbides preferably along grain boundary.

SEM micrographs confirmed the inferences drawn from optical imaging (Fig. 4). Along grain boundary bright islands indicated spherodisation of carbides (indicated by arrows). Along grain boundary void coalescence resulted in crack formation (Fig. 4a and c). Region close to bulging also revealed interconnected voids that were generated during service exploitation. Creep damage occurred at elevated temperature under stress. Owing to local temperature rise beyond the designated/recommended maximum temperature of use over a period of time caused grain boundary sliding. The sliding generated de-cohesion/voids at boundary. With time voids grew in size and became inter connected. This weakened grain boundary strength with ultimate reduction in load bearing capability of component. Severe spherodisation of carbide and void generation were the indication of local temperature rise. Therefore, temperature rise at high stress level caused two phenomena i.e. carbide spherodisation and creep damage to create voids. SEM investigation also carried out from inner to outer surface to reveal pre-dominant structural changes – if any for tubes near fracture (Fig. 5).
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (624KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. SEM micrographs of transverse section of damaged tubes (a) sample A2, (b) sample A3 and (c) sample B2; g.b.voids/cracks and alloy carbides were visible along grain boundary.

Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (701KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. SEM micrographs across inner to outer region of damaged tubes (a) inner – sample A4, (b) outer – sample A4, (c) inner – sample B3, (d) outer – sample B3 and (e) EDs spectrum from precipitate as shown in Fig. 5b with quantification indicating Cr-Mo rich alloy carbide.

Practically, either inner or outer region close to fracture did not exhibit significant change with respect to Fig. 4. EDS spectrum was obtained from one of the precipitates along grain boundary. Semi-quantitative analysis revealed that precipitates were complex mixed alloy carbides with Cr and Mo as major constituents.
3.4. Hardness measurement
The bulk hardness at different location of failed component is given in Table 3. With respect to as received material hardness of ∼200 BHN as indicated in published literature/standards for this grade of Cr-Mo steel, the hardness was reduced drastically near fracture indicating materials softening during service. Bulged area exhibited little higher hardness as the damage might be little less in that region with respect to fractured location over same time span. It could be possible that with still longer exposure, the hardness of bulged area might reach to the hardness of failure location.
Table 3. Bulk hardness of failed tubes at different location.

Empty Cell	Sample A2	Sample B2	Sample B3
Hardness (BHN)	114 ± 1.5	114 ± 0.5	126 ± 1
3.5. X-ray diffraction study
Fig. 6 illustrated the characteristic X-ray spectrum of corrosion products obtained from different location of failed tube. X-ray diffraction analysis revealed the presence of different Fe-oxides and hydroxides. Bulk composition of such deposits was also examined in EDS to find out qualitatively the constituents (Fig. 7). Major peaks in illustration indicated the presence of iron and oxygen. It referred that corrosion products were mainly iron oxide in association with minor amount of other chemical species of steel.
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (477KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. X-ray characteristic spectrum from the deposits of oxidation corrosion (a) Tube – A and (b) Tube-B; Corrosion products were mostly iron oxides and hydroxides of different grades.

Fig. 7
Download: Download high-res image (273KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Qualitative EDS analysis of scales formed inside the tube (a) scales from tube A and (b) scales from tube B.

3.6. Fractography
SEM fractographs of both tubes are displayed in Fig. 8. Large sized micro-voids/dimples were observed envisaging softening of tube material (Fig. 8a and c). The softening of alloy was established through reduction in bulk hardness as indicated in Table 3. Ductile fracture signified micro-void coalescence resulting in overload failure. For sample A, fracture surface was mostly covered with oxides and it was difficult to explore specific features underneath apart from ductility failure (Fig. 8a). In some regions cracked thick skin of oxide layer was found (Fig. 8b). In case of sample B2, intergranular failure was observed (arrows in Fig. 8d) at localised regions; however, most of the area of fracture surface indicated ductile dimple fracture (Fig. 8c). This intergranular cracking was originated from voids adjacent to grain boundary due to creep (Fig. 4).
Fig. 8
Download: Download high-res image (683KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. SEM fractographs of damaged tubes (a) & (b) near sample A2, (c) & (d) close to sample B2.

Thus, thin lip fish mouth opening of fracture surface of both tube A and B was the signature of mix mode failure. In that case, creep deformation was accompanied by wall thinning through necking. This reduced strength of the alloy resulting in dimple rupture. If creep became the only operating mechanism, then it became thick lip fish mouth failure as there would be no scope for material flow/deformation to reduce wall thickness.
3.7. Evaluation of hoop stress
In straight tube, any force applied over circumference/cylindrical wall (i.e. a normal stress along tangential/azimuth direction) is termed as circumferential stress or hoop stress. Hoop stress is tensile in nature. In case of thin-walled tube, it has been assumed that wall thickness becomes no more than one-tenth of its radius. This allows for treating the wall as a surface, and subsequently using the Young–Laplace equation [13] for estimating the hoop stress.
Fracture is governed by the hoop stress in the absence of other external loads, since it is the largest principal stress. It is noteworthy that greatest stress is experienced inside of tube; hence cracks in tubes should theoretically start from inside the tube. Yielding is governed by an equivalent stress that includes hoop stress and the longitudinal or radial stress when present. Hoop stress is expressed in following fashion,
σ = P.d. (2t)−1
Where, P is the stress in MPa, d is the internal diameter of tube in mm and t is the wall thickness in mm. Considering inside operating pressure of tube 100 Kgf/cm2, the hoop stress in un-deformed and deformed regions of tube A and B was calculated and given in Table 4. These values were compared with room temperature tensile properties of annealed T22 alloy.
Table 4. Hoop stress distribution in failed tubes.

Sample ID	Hoop stress σ (MPa)	Empty Cell	YS (MPa)	UTS (MPa)
Un-deformed	Deformed		
Sample-A	21.3	224.7		
Sample-B	21.0	352.6		
T22 alloy			220.0	415.0
From Table 4 it was evident, that with respect to un-deformed region, deformed region experienced excessive normal stress during service exploitation due to oxidation corrosion assisted wall thinning, which was greater than the yield strength of tube material. Considering T22 alloy, this category of Cr-Mo steel able to retain their strength up to ∼520 °C and then reduced drastically and may reach ∼30 MPa (0.25 off set yield) at ∼600 °C. Therefore, apart from oxide scales, local heating beyond operating temperature propelled material flow and softening to thin down the tube wall further. This thin wall was unable to with stand high hoop stress, hence failed under overload.
4. Observations
i
The component was made of Cr-Mo low alloy steel. Composition was close to Polish specification of ‘Steel 10H2M’. Other equivalent specification was DIN 10CrMo910/T22. Concentration of major chemical species was within the specified limit.
ii
iMicrostructure of steel tube consisted of polygonal ferrite grains containing pearlite and alloy carbide. During service exposure, oxide scales were formed inside the tube. When the scale thickness became substantial, it started hindering heat transfer across the tube wall. Thus localized heating took place. Scale formation, its growth and subsequent removal by loosening from material surface were continuous process. This resulted in reduction in wall thickness of tube. However, as it becomes a non-steady state phenomenon, any further quantification of data might lead to misleading information for high temperature deformation characteristics. Moreover, Heating coarsened the carbides and propelled precipitation of new brittle phases along grain boundary. This caused further embrittlement.
iii
Under stress and temperature, grain boundary sliding promoted void formation along boundary and at latter stage they became interconnected. This further weakened the structure.
iv
Dimension of the tube near fracture was changed drastically. It seemed that materials got softened. Material softening was confirmed through evaluation of bulk hardness near failed location. The value was exorbitantly low with respect to investigated material as indicated in literature. In addition to earlier effect of scale formation, the softening contributed in material’s flow also and created bulging.
v
Initially by creep i.e. intergranular cracking and subsequently due to overload ductile fracture under excessive hoop stress beyond the yield point of tube material, the component failed during service exploitation. This was endorsed by ‘Thin Lip Fish Mouth’ fracture at both the failed location.