Sections of wire rope that had been used as lightning protection at the launch pads were submitted for damage
inspection to determine potential future usage of similar wire rope for future programs. The samples were pulltested as part of a separate investigation, and were subsequently submitted for evaluation of any service damage.
The wire rope was reportedly type 316 stainless steel (UNS S31600), 6x 19 right regular lay, with a 7x7 independent
wire rope core (IWRC), installed in 2001 and removed in 2008.
Portions of the wire rope were photographed both in the field prior to pull testing and as received after pull
testing. The majority of the ropes fractured at the swage fittings that were used to loop the wire ropes for pull
testing. The fitting acted as a stress concentration due to the clamping of the fitting onto the wire rope. However,
one sample fractured during pull testing at a damaged location on the wire rope and not at the swage fitting location.
Visual observation of the wire rope revealed damage that was due to two separate environmental problems:
corrosion and possible lightning damage.
3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
I. Damage due to lightning
Several areas of damage were observed on the surface of the wire rope that were apparent localized melted and
Figure 4. SEM image (top) and cross-section
(bottom) of the wire rope.
fused wires. Orange corrosion product was observed on
the wire rope in the areas of the melting damage. The
one pull test sample that did not fail at the swage fitting
failed at one of the areas of apparent melting damage.
SEM examination of one of these areas of damage
observed via stereomicroscope revealed a melted bead
of metal that formed during a localized heating event, as
shown in Fig. 4 (blue arrow).
One of the areas of apparent melting and
resolidification was cross sectioned and prepared for
metallographic examination, as shown in Fig. 4 (yellow
line). Observation of the cross-section indicated that
five of the nineteen wires in the strand were damaged.
The area of interest had a typical weld-like dendritic
microstructure, confirming that the material had been
melted and resolidified, as illustrated in Fig. 4 (red inset
image). The base metal consisted of extremely fine
austenitic grains in the transverse direction. The etchant
preferentially reacted with the melted and resolidified
metal, indicating that it is more prone to chemical attack
than the original wire rope material, as confirmed
through the observation of corrosion product in these damaged areas.
Microhardness measurements were taken on the wire rope cross-section. No significant hardness difference was
noted in the wires near the damaged areas as compared to the rest of the wires, which indicates that the heat affected
zone of the damaged area was very small.
2. Damage due to corrosion
Visual and stereomicroscopic inspection of the fractured wires in one of the ropes revealed pitting of the interior
of several of the wires, as shown in the top left image in
Fig. 5. Approximately one quarter of the wires in one
strand had reduced cross-sectional areas due to the pitting.
SEM observation of these wire indicated that the pitting
was not limited to the exterior of the wires, and in some
cases, the corrosion process preferentially attacked the
interior of the wires, leading to a wormhole-like
appearance.
The pitted wire sample was analyzed using EDS via
the SEM. Spherical deposits containing aluminum and
chlorine were observed within the pit, as shown in Fig. 5
(circled), which are typical of solid rocket booster (SRB)
combustion product deposit. The corrosion product
consisted primarily of oxygen, iron, and chromium with
minor amounts of both chlorine and sulfur. The corrosion
was likely due to chloride-induced pitting of the stainless
steel wire from the chlorine-containing SRB deposition
and from the marine environment.
One of the pitted wires was mounted and
metallographically prepared to observe the longitudinal
cross-section of the wire. Approximately two-thirds of the
interior portion of the cross-section was pitted, as shown
Figure 5. The pits observed via stereomicroscope
(top left) were determined via SEM (bottom image)
and EOS (spectrum) to contain SRB deposition
(circled). The cross-section of the wire was
reduced due to pitting (top right).
in the top right image in Fig. 5. The grain structure of the wire was extremely elongated due to cold-working. The
4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
grain boundary attack caused the wormhole-like pitting of the interior of the wire since the corrosion mechanism
acted longitudinally with the grain structure. In other words, the directionality of the grains due to cold working
influenced the directionality of the pitting process, leading to wormhole-like pitting of the wire.
The metallurgical evaluation of the wire rope used at the launch pad as part of the lightning protection system for
eight years revealed localized damage due to two different environmental factors. The localized nature of the
damage in both cases would likely not affect the overall strength of the wire rope because only one quarter of the
wires in one of the strands was damaged. Inspection of the wire rope would reveal the lightning strike damage areas
because they occur on the surface of the wire rope; however, the pitting of the interior of the wires would be more
difficult to detect through visual inspection.
C. Failure Due to Processing and Maintenance Problems5
A spherical bearing from a steering cylinder of the crawler transporter (CT) was submitted for failure analysis
when a crack was observed
during maintenance. The
crawler transporter is used to
transport the shuttle
transportation system to the
launch pad after mating
operations in the Vehicle
Assembly Building (V AB). The
spherical bearing assumes the
horizontal load during the
steering of one of the four
individual truck assemblies.
The drawing specifies that the
spberical bearing be composed
of A1S1 E 52100 bearing steel
(UNS G52986). Fig. 6 shows
the location of the steering
cylinder (blue arrow) and the
Figure 6. Image of the CT in the storage field (left) showing the steering
cylinder (blue arrow) and the location of the cracked bearing (red arrow).
The crack was observed on the surface of the spherical bearing (right,
yellow arrow).
location of the cracked bearing (red arrow).
The bearing was photographed as-received to document the location of the crack on the bearing, as shown in Fig.
6. A lubrication groove was located around the circumference of the spherical bearing. The bearing was submitted
for nondestructive evaluation (NDE) by liquid penetrant and magnetic particle examination in order to extent of the
Laboratory·induced
overload fracture
:! cm
Figure 7. The revealed fracture surface displayed crack
arrest marks (yellow lines).
indicate that the failure was progressive, as shown in Fig. 7.
which was located on the weak axis of the spherical bearing.
cracking. The crack tip was located just below
the lubrication groove. A witness mark was
observed on the interior surface of the spherical
bearing, directly across from the location of the
crack. The witness mark was more pronounced
on the lower portion of the spherical bearing,
indicating that uneven pressure was applied to the
spherical bearing.
The spherical bearing was sectioned and the
crack was opened in order to reveal the service
fracture surface. The fracture surface was coated
with grease and had a burnt odor when it was
opened, evidence that the bearing was in
operation subsequent to crack formation. The
fracture surface was cleaned ultrasonically and
visually examined and the fracture surface
displayed conchoidal crack-arrest lines that
The blue arrow indicates the location of the origin,
Analysis of the fracture surface via SEM revealed mainly intergranular fracture features with localized areas of
microvoid coalescence (MVC). The fracture surface also had smeared regions and corrosion product, which are
further indications that the bearing was in service subsequent to fracture. Qualitative/semi-quantitative EDS
5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
analysis via the SEM indicated that the corrosion product consisted primarily of iron and oxygen with minor
amounts of silicon and sulfur. Although no microscopic indication of fatigue striations were observed, the fracture
features were consistent with progressive failure in high strength steel.
Metallographic specimens were prepared from cross sections of the fracture surface. The fracture surface
showed intergranular features with secondary cracks emanating from the fracture surface. The microstructure
consisted of tempered martensite with evenly dispersed undissolved carbide particles and manganese sulfide
stringers, typical for high strength bearing steel. SEM/EDS analysis confirmed that the dark colored particles were
manganese sulfide. Converted3 through-thickness microhardness measurements taken on the metallographic
specimens averaged 56 Rockwell C scale (HRC), meeting the specified 55 HRC minimum.
Lubricant samples from two different bearing locations and from the tube of unused grease were submitted for
analysis. The lubricant from the failed bearing location had been changed during installation of the new bearing, so
the sample from this location was a mixture of unused grease and grease at the time of failure. A sample was also
taken from cylinder bearing that had not been changed in order to analyze a typical operational sample. A sample of
unused grease was taken from the container that was supplied by the technicians who indicated that it was used
during bearing maintenance. Both of the used samples were a darker brown color than the unused sample and were
heavily contaminated with particles, which degrades the lubricity of the grease.
The samples were analyzed for oxidation with Fourier transformed infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) and for water
content with the Karl Fischer Test. The FT-IR results confirmed that all of the samples were lithium base soap type
grease consistent with the composition of the specified grease. The Karl Fischer test results indicated that the grease
had absorbed water during service, typical for this type of grease. The unused sample displayed elevated water
content above the optimum initial content, which could be due to age and exposure during storage.
Qualitative/semi-quantitative SEM/EDS analysis of particles extracted from both of the used grease samples
indicated that the grease was contaminated with several metallic and nonmetallic particles. The compositions of the
various particles were consistent with corrosion product and environmental contaminants such as sand and rock
fragments.
The lubricant analysis indicated severe degradation due to age and contamination with environmental particles.
Also, macroscopic indications of misalignment were found on the interior wall of the spherical bearing. The bearing
failed in a progressive manner, likely the result of misalignment, with periods of fast crack growth corresponding to
cycles of large applied loads. The misalignment could be caused by the failure of the grease to properly transfer the
load, leading to the bearing binding in its race. 