Abstract
This article describes the findings of a detailed investigation into the failure of a secondary super heater tube in a 140 MW thermal power plant. Preliminary macroscopic examinations along with visual examination, dimensional measurement and chemical analysis were carried out to deduce the probable cause of failure. In addition optical microscopy was a necessary supplement to understand the cause of failure. It was concluded that the tube had failed due to severe creep damage caused by high metal temperature during service. The probable causes of high metal temperature may be in sufficient flow of steam due to partial blockage, presence of thick oxide scale on ID surface, high flue gas temperature etc. rupture.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Super heaterCreep damageOxide scaleFailure
1. Introduction
The failure of industrial boilers has been a prominent feature in fossil fuel fired power plants. The contribution of several factors appears to be responsible for failures, culminating in the partial or complete shutdown of the plant. A survey of the literature [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8] pertaining to the performance of steam boilers during the last 30 years shows that abundant cases have been referred to, concerned with the failure of boilers due to fuel ash corrosion, overheating, hydrogen attack, carburization and decarburization, corrosion fatigue cracking, stress corrosion cracking, caustic embrittlement, erosion, etc. Erosion and vibration caused by ash laden flue gas can result in boiler tube failures if operating conditions are different from design conditions. High gas flow velocities can cause tubes to vibrate at high frequencies and result in fatigue cracking failures [9]. Corrosion by combustion product, oxidation and by impure boiler water can significantly reduce the tube wall thickness and result in failure of a tube many years before the expected end of its useful service life. Exposure of the tube steel to elevated temperature causes microstructural changes of the steel constituents [10], [11], [12]. For example, carbon steel will experience spheroidization in which iron carbide particles change from plate or rod shapes to more or less spherical ones. Plain carbon and carbon molybdenum steel will experience graphitization in which Fe3C particles transform into free iron and graphite particles. Austenitic stainless steel will develop carbide precipitates intermetallic compounds. Microstructural changes occur even at design conditions with long term service. Their formations are accelerated when tube steel is operated above design conditions. Operation above design conditions is called “overheating” and can lead to tube failure through a stress rupture failure mechanism.
The majority of forced outages of power boilers are due to premature failure of boiler components [13], [14], [15], [16]. Boiler tube failures are the main cause of forced outages of power generating units. In the United States, the cost penalty is estimated to be in excess of 5 billion dollars a year in replacement power charges and maintenance costs [15]. The contribution of total tube failures can be grouped as furnace water wall tubing 40%, super heater tubes 30%, reheater tubes 15%, economizer tubes 10% and burner tubes 5% [9]. The final super heater tube is one of the critical components of a power boiler in the production of superheated steam. In this case, an investigation has been carried out on a failed secondary super heater tube in a coal fired 140 MW power plant. One piece of the failed tube was received for conducting the failure analysis.
The original outside diameter and wall thickness of the failed tube were 54.0 mm and 10.0 mm, respectively. The design temperature of the tube was 540 °C and pressure was 137 kg/cm2. The tube was made of ASME SA-213 Gr T-22 grade steel, which is basically 2.25% Cr, 1% Mo steel. The tube was exposed in service for 36,000 hours of operation before the failure.
2. Examination details
Visual examination of the failed secondary super heater tube was carried out around the failure zone and photographs were taken to document the nature of failure. The visual examination was carried out by the unaided eye and also with a portable magnifying lens. The outside diameter of the failed tube was measured at the failure location and also in an intact zone. The results of chemical analysis of the tube material are shown in Table 1. In order to study the microstructure, small specimens from promising areas of the tube were removed and mounted for suitable edge retention. All the mounted specimens were polished with successive grades of emery papers up to 1000 grit size followed by cloth polishing with 1 μm diamond paste. These metallographic specimens were etched by 2% NITAL and examined under an optical metallurgical microscope. Hardness measurements were carried out on the samples taken away from the failed tube.
Table 1. Chemical composition of tube sample (weight %).

Constituent elements in % Wt.	Failed tube	Fresh tube	ASME SA-213 Gr T-22
C	0.11	0.13	0.08–0.15
Si	0.3	0.28	0.50 max
Mn	0.43	0.44	0.40–0.70
Cr	2.35	2.10	2.00–2.50
Mo	1.02	1.05	0.90–1.20
3. Results and discussion
The visual examination of the tube revealed that the tube had failed by a typical narrow open burst with longitudinal cracking, and the failed zone was accompanied by noticeable swelling of the tube circumference (Fig. 1). This indicates that the tube had suffered from noticeable creep deformation. There was a thick and tightly adherent scale on the outside surface over the length of the failed tube and the tube had cracked along the tube-axis in a typical manner (Fig. 2). Dimensional measurement of the tube revealed that the increase in diameter of the tube at the vicinity of damage due to swelling was 13%. The chemical composition of the tube conformed to the material specification ASME SA-213 Gr T-22.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (194KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Secondary super heater tube, showing general view of narrow open burst and swelling of the tube circumference.

Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (256KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Secondary super heater tube, showing typical longitudinal cracking of scale.

Metallographic analysis adjacent to failure location revealed the microstructures as given in Fig. 3(a–c). The microstructures contain ferrite, martensite and linked creep cavities forming
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (2MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. (a) Micrograph showing penetration of crack through tube wall and numerous creep voids in the vicinity of crack tip (etched with nital). (b) Micrograph showing ferrite, martensite and linked creep cavities forming micro-cracks at low magnification (etched with nital). (c) Micrograph showing ferrite, martensite and linked creep cavities forming micro-cracks at higher magnification (etched with nital). (d) Ferrite and martensite along with numerous creep voids at low magnification (etched with nital). (e) Ferrite and martensite along with numerous creep voids at higher magnification (etched with nital). (f) Ferrite and martensite along with isolated creep voids (etched with nital).

micro-cracks. The microstructure diametrically opposite to the failure location of the tube is shown in Fig. 3(d–e). It reveals ferrite and martensite along with numerous creep voids. The microstructure away from failure location as shown in Fig. 3(f) exhibits ferrite and martensite along with isolated creep voids. Similar observation has been found by earlier investigator
[17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22], [23]. From the relative amounts of ferrite and martensite the tube metal temperature at the time of failure, presumably was above its A1 (730 °C) temperature. From this two phase austenite and ferrite temperature region, the tube metal was cooled rapidly by on-rushing steam, transforming the austenite to martensite. The load used for hardness measurement was 20 kg, and the average value was taken after three indentations. Hardness on failure location, diametrically opposite to failure and away from the failure location were 319 HV, 315 and 312 HV (∼307BHN), respectively. The high hardness of more than 300 Hv of this tube sample is due to the transformation of hard phase martensite.
4. Conclusion
Based on technical information provided and the findings of laboratory study, it is concluded that the tube had failed due to severe creep damage caused by high metal temperature during service. The probable causes of high metal temperature may be in sufficient flow of steam due to partial blockage, presence of thick oxide scale on ID surface, high flue gas temperature etc.