Abstract
The erosion of the tungsten (W) first wall by the seeding impurity neon (Ne) is foreseen in ITER. Accurate physical sputtering yields are crucial in defining the operating window that is consistent with the operational budget of the ITER divertor/main wall. However, the influence of crystal orientation and surface nanostructure—due to helium plasma exposure, on the physical sputtering yield is poorly understood. Here, we explore such influence for W bombarded by fusion-relevant Ne plasmas experimentally. In the first set of experiments, polished polycrystalline W targets were exposed to ∼ 50 eV Ne plasmas to a fluence of ∼ 3◊1026 m−2. Subsequent secondary electron imaging revealed pronounced selective surface erosion. Combined with electron backscatter diffraction, we found that the (111) grains were more resilient to physical sputtering than the (100) grains. In the second set of experiments, He plasma exposure was performed to generate ‘fuzzy’ surfaces prior to Ne plasma exposure. By monitoring the intensity ratio between the W I and Ne II emission lines, strongly reduced, nonlinear erosion of the ‘fuzzy’ surfaces was observed. Measurable physical sputtering yields as low as 20 % of the smooth counterpart were recorded, which decreased with increasing ‘fuzzy’ layer thickness. The results highlight the impact of grain orientation and surface nanostructure on the physical sputtering yield of W bombarded by Ne. Moreover, the sputtering resistance of the ‘fuzzy’ layer may be exploited to boost the first wall performance in fusion devices.
Keywords
Physical sputteringNe plasmaCrystal orientationFuzz nanostructure
1. Introduction
Minimizing the erosion of plasma facing materials (PFMs) is a key design driver in fusion devices. The divertors were originally introduced into magnetic confinement devices to lower the impurity level [1]. It further results in the choice of tungsten (W) as the PFM in ITER [2,3], which features a low physical sputtering yield. Nevertheless, erosion of W by neon (Ne), which is a seeding impurity for detachment control, is expected in ITER [4], therefore motivating the current study.
Although the physical sputtering yields of W by Ne bombardment have been measured experimentally and computed numerically, our understanding of the influence of crystal orientation and surface nanostructure remains incomplete. The calculated sputtering yields by the Monte Carlo program TRIM.SP [5] are widely used in the fusion community but these values are computed assuming a randomized target structure. Physical sputtering yields have been measured at Ne bombardment energies from the threshold to 300 eV for W targets with a unknown microstructure [6]. More recently, the physical sputtering yield for a large number of orientations of W were measured for keV gallium ions and a significant crystal orientation dependence was observed [7,8]. Whether this holds for tens of eV Ne ions, which is more relevant to PFMs, remains to be clarified. Another important factor to consider is the formation of nanostructure (‘fuzz’) due to helium (He) plasma exposure. When bombarded with Ar plasmas, such ‘fuzzy’ surfaces exhibited markedly reduced sputtering yields [9,10]. Yet, no such experiment exists for Ne plasmas
The aim of this study is to assess the influence of grain orientation and surface nanostructure on the physical sputtering yield of W bombarded by fusion-relevant Ne plasmas. Sputtering experiments were performed in a linear plasma generator under well-controlled conditions, followed by complementary microstructural analysis to interpret the results.
2. Materials and methods
Pure (>99.95 %) polycrystalline W specimens measuring 20◊20◊1 mm3 were cut from a plate supplied by Beijing Antai Zhongke Metals Co., Ltd., China. A conventional metallographic procedure including grinding and mechanical polishing was applied to obtain mirror-finished surfaces. No stress relief annealing was conducted.
Plasma exposure was performed in the linear plasma device SPARROW [11]. A reciprocating Langmuir probe combined with four-parameter fit [12,13] was used to measure the radially distributed ion flux, 
, electron temperature, 
, and floating potential, 
. The ion impact energy, 
, mainly controlled by negatively biasing the target to 
, is calculated as:
(1)
in which 
 represents the thermal energy of the ions at the sheath edge [14]. The plasma potential, 
, reads:
(2)
where the pre-sheath potential drop, 
, is:
(3)
and the sheath potential drop, 
, is:
(4)
where 
, 
, and 
 denotes the electron mass, ion mass, and ion temperature, respectively. 
 is assumed, as measured by collective Thomson scattering for Ne plasmas generated by a similar cascaded arc source [15]. The secondary electron emission yield, 
, is calculated according to the Young-Dekker formula parameterized with Walker’s experimental data [16]. The target surface temperature was measured by a FMPI SpectroPyrometer in the 900–1700 nm wavelength range.
Microstructural analysis was enabled by a ZEISS crossbeam 550 FIB-SEM. 5 kV and 1nA for secondary electron imaging, 20 kV and 10nA for electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD), and 30 kV, 700 pA for fine cross-sectional ion milling were used. An AvaSpec-ULS4096CL-8-EVO spectrometer was used to observe the Ne II (324.835 nm) and W I (400.875 nm) emission lines, in which channel the spectral resolution is 0.07–0.09 nm.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Pristine microstructure and plasma parameters
Fig. 1(a) demonstrates a representative color-coded Z-axis inverse pole figure (IPF-Z) mapping, meaning that the specimen surface normal is projected into the crystal coordinates (inset). The microstructure consists mainly of (001) grains (red), followed by (111) grains (blue), and (113) grains (purple). Such a strongly textured microstructure results from the hot-rolling process. In Fig. 1(b), the equivalent grain radius distribution is shown, from which the grain radius is calculated to be 
 μm.

Download: Download high-res image (413KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Pristine microstructure of the W specimen. (a) IPF-Z mapping. (b) Distribution of the grain radius.

Fig. 2(a) shows the ion flux, 
, distribution of the Ne plasma discharge with a gas flow of 310 sccm, and a discharge current of 75 A. The distribution is approximately Gaussian, as confirmed by the Gaussian fit, from which the full width at half maximum is 26 mm. The ion impact energy, 
, distribution is plotted in Fig. 2(b) when biasing the target to −70 V. The plasms exposure conditions are summarized in Table 1, in which the peak values are reported. Similarly, various He plasms discharges were used to produce ‘fuzzy’ surfaces.

Download: Download high-res image (161KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Ne plasma parameters. (a) Ion flux, 
, profile. (b) Ion impact energy, 
, profile.

Table 1. Plasma exposure parameters. Specimen C, D, and E are subjected to He and Ne plasma exposure sequentially.

Specimen	He plasma	Ne plasma
◊1023, (m-2s−1)	
, (eV)	
, (oC)	Time, (s)	
◊1023, (m-2s−1)	
, (eV)	
, (oC)	Time, (s)
A	−	1.41 ± 0.12	54 ± 3	782 ± 5a	2000 ± 5
B	−	1.78 ± 0.11	53 ± 3	2000 ± 5
C	2.82 ± 0.28	65 ± 5	865 ± 6	3600 ± 5	2.09 ± 0.54	77 ± 6	943 ± 79b	1740 ± 5
D	8.85 ± 0.25	61 ± 2	1297 ± 14	3600 ± 5	875 ± 141b	2340 ± 5
E	7.6 ± 0.5	61 ± 4	1110 ± 31	3600 ± 5	889 ± 101b	3300 ± 5
a
Measured by a thermocouple on the rear side of the specimen.
b
The surface temperature increases in accordance with the He II line intensity to a plateau of ∼ 980 °C.
3.2. Ne plasma sputtering of smooth surfaces
After moderate Ne plasma exposure (specimen A condition), selective erosion of the original smooth surface is observed. With secondary electron imaging in Fig. 3(a), terrace-like patches of dark contrast stand out, suggesting that they are more resilient to physical sputtering than the surrounding grains. In between, there are grains with ‘erosion lines’, as marked by the white dashed box. Combined with EBSD IPF-Z mapping of the same area in Fig. 3(b), we can discern that the terrace-like patches are (111) grains, the grains with ‘erosion lines’ are (113) grains, and the pits are (100) grains. In other words, the (111) grains are more resilient to physical sputtering than the (100) grains. To double-check the finding, an area in another smooth specimen from the same W plate is first marked by Vickers indents, the IPF-Z mapping of which is shown in Fig. 3(c). After similar Ne plasma exposure (specimen B condition), the corresponding IPF-Z mapping in Fig. 3(d) reveals a shrinkage of the (111) grains, which is consistent with the observation in specimen A. The reduction of (111) grains may be attributed to the complete erosion of these surface grains, subsequently exposing subsurface grains that are more resistant to physical sputtering. Crystal-orientation-dependent physical sputtering of W bombarded by fusion-relevant Ne plasmas is the first main result of this paper.

Download: Download high-res image (540KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Selective surface erosion after Ne plasma exposure. (a) Surface morphology, and (b) IPF-Z mapping of specimen A. IPF-Z mapping of the same area (c) before and (d) after similar plasma exposure of specimen B.

Our observation is consistent with sputtering experiments of W by argon ions. After exposure to a deuterium plasma mixed with 7 % argon with an incident energy of 70 eV, Rasinski et al. reported that the highest local erosion is observed for grains close to the (100) orientation [17]. This phenomenon is likely driven by the fact that collisional cascades are dependent on surface orientation in the near-threshold regime of physical sputtering, a manifestation of which is the angular distribution function (ADF) of sputtered atoms. From high-resolution emission spectroscopy, the ADF of the W (100) surface indeed differs from that of the (111) surface when bombarded by 50–90 eV argon ions [18]. Nevertheless, more work is required to understand orientation-dependent physical sputtering yields in the near threshold regime of W.
The result suggests that grains with (100) planes parallel to the target surface normal are unfavorable for the ITER W divertor in terms of erosion resistance. Such a textured microstructure forms during recrystallization [19,20]. This combination affects the divertor lifetime in a positive feedback loop: Surface grains are converted to the (100) orientation by recrystallization, followed by accelerated physical sputtering. The process repeats itself for newly exposed subsurface grains. Consequently, accelerated erosion of the ITER divertor may occur through the synergy of orientation-dependent physical sputtering and recrystallization and should be examined in greater detail.
3.3. Ne plasma sputtering of ‘fuzzy’ surfaces
In this section, we study the sputtering behavior of ‘fuzzy’ W surfaces by Ne plasmas, which is expected in ITER. To this end, different He plasma discharges (specimen C-E condition in Table 1) are first used to grow ‘fuzzy’ layers, see Fig. 4. Prior to cross-sectional focused ion beam milling, a protective Pt layer is deposited. For each specimen, two locations separated by ∼ 100 μm were examined to obtain statistically sound results. The measured thickness, corrected for specimen tilting, is ∼ 0.3 μm, ∼1.5 μm, and ∼ 3 μm, respectively. Additionally, by image analysis of the top and cross-sectional secondary electron micrographs, the diameter of the nano-tendrils and the open volume fraction of each ‘fuzzy’ layer is measured, as summarized in Table 2.

Download: Download high-res image (367KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. ‘Fuzzy’ W surfaces produced by He plasma exposure. (a) Top surface morphology of specimen C and its cross-sectional view in (a1), exhibiting a ∼ 0.3 μm thick ‘fuzzy’ layer. (b) Top surface morphology of specimen D and its cross-sectional view in (b1), exhibiting a ∼ 1.5 μm thick ‘fuzzy’ layer. (c) Top surface morphology of specimen D and its cross-sectional view in (c1), exhibiting a ∼ 3 μm thick ‘fuzzy’ layer.

Table 2. Statistics of the ‘fuzzy’ layer.

Specimen	Thickness, (μm)	Diameter, (nm)	Open volume fraction
C	0.31 ± 0.01	18.46 ± 7.63	25.2 %
D	1.44 ± 0.14	78.06 ± 12.92	39.4 %
E	3.16 ± 0.10	42.44 ± 2.41	29.8 %
During Ne plasma exposure of the ‘fuzzy’ surfaces, the W I (400.875 nm) emission line is used to monitor the sputtering in real-time. To compensate for changes in the plasma flux, the Ne II (324.835 nm) emission line is also recorded. As illustrated in Fig. 5 for the 3 μm thick ‘fuzzy’ surface, the Ne II line intensity increases with time, which is likely due to the reduced secondary electron emission of the ‘fuzzy’ surface compared with that of the smooth surface [21]. Using a spherical deflector analyzer, Schäfer et al. measured the angle-resolved energy distributions for true secondary electrons emitted in the normal direction from a clean W(100) surface with a primary energy of 20 eV [22]. Assuming that the same energy distribution curve holds for our plasma exposure experiment (Te = 3.2 eV), the average energy of the secondary electrons is then 7 eV. The same phenomenon is observed for the other ‘fuzzy’ surfaces.

Download: Download high-res image (122KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Evolution of the Ne II and W I spectral lines of the 3 μm thick ‘fuzzy’ surface.

The W I/Ne II intensity ratios for the three ‘fuzzy’ surfaces are plotted in Fig. 6 as a function of time. Each measurement ends when the ratio reaches a plateau, indicating complete erosion of the ‘fuzzy’ layer. The control experiment of a smooth surface target confirms this assumption. The dashed lines are smoothed data points (using a moving average filter) to guide the eye. The arrow indicates the lifetime of each ‘fuzzy’ layer—the thicker the longer. However, the lifetime is not proportional to thickness. The sigmoid intensity ratio profiles also indicate that the erosion process is nonlinear.

Download: Download high-res image (180KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Time evolution of the W I/Ne II spectral intensity ratios of the ‘fuzzy’ W surfaces during Ne plasma exposure.

The proportionality between the line intensity and sputtered flux allows for converting the intensity ratio into the sputtering yield. The plateau value (0.675 ± 0.025) in Fig. 6 corresponds to a sputtering yield of 0.033 (Ei = 77 ± 6 eV) according to the measurements by Stuart et al. [6]. The same scaling factor is applied to other intensity ratios. This approach was used in previous studies [6,9]. In this way, the minimum sputtering yield—determined by the detection limit (filled markers) of the spectrometer—of each ‘fuzzy’ surface is summarized in Fig. 7.

Download: Download high-res image (233KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Energy dependence of the sputtering yields of W (smooth vs. ‘fuzzy’ surfaces) impacted by Ne at normal incidence.

Compared with Stuart’s measurements of smooth W targets, a reduction in sputtering yield ranging from 2 to 5 times is registered. Even lower sputtering yields, which are buried in the noise floor in Fig. 6, exist but cannot be quantified at this moment. Strongly reduced physical sputtering yields on ‘fuzzy’ W surfaces bombarded by fusion-relevant Ne plasmas are the second main result of this paper.
Compared with the Ar plasma sputtering experiments of ‘fuzzy’ W surfaces by Nishijima et al [9], we obtain similar values of sputtering yield reduction (
), in which the lines are guides to the eye (Fig. 8). Additionally, the thicker the ‘fuzzy’ layer the smaller the value of 
. Similar results have been reported for the case of He plasma sputtering of ‘fuzzy’ Mo surfaces [23]. This phenomenon seems to be universal.

Download: Download high-res image (128KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. The ‘fuzzy’ layer thickness, ion bombardment energy and ion type dependence of sputtering yield reduction on ‘fuzzy’ W surfaces.

The porosity of the ‘fuzzy’ layer and line-of-sight redeposition of the sputtered atoms are generally considered as the causes of the reduced sputtering yield. For example, the thickness dependence in Fig. 8 is attributed to the increase in porosity of the ‘fuzzy’ layer with increasing layer thickness [9]. However, the open volume fraction decreases when the ‘fuzzy’ layer thickness increases from 1.5 μm to 3 μm in our case (Tabel 2). A more recent study relates the thickness-dependent reduction in sputtering yield to the collision mean-free-path of the ‘fuzzy’ layer [23].
Despite these insights, we envisage the following improvements to sharpen our understanding of this interesting and important phenomenon. First, high-sensitivity spectroscopic measurement of the sputtering yield. As explained in Fig. 6, we suspect the presence of more strongly reduced sputtering yields than measured. In principle, the spectroscopic method allows for the measurement of sputtering yield of the order of 10-4 (e.g. Stuart’s measurements in Fig. 7). Second, three-dimensional imaging of the ‘fuzzy’ layer. So far, important quantities of the ‘fuzzy’ layer, such as porosity, are derived from cross-sectional micrographs. We plan to improve this situation by FIB-SEM tomography in the near future. Third, large-scale molecular dynamics simulations of the sputtering process of the ‘fuzzy’ layer. Although three-dimensional BCA code, e.g. TRI3DYN, has been used for this purpose, atomistic scale interactions are still missing. Considering a 0.1◊0.1◊3 μm3 representative elementary volume of the ‘fuzzy’ layer with 90 % porosity, the number of W atoms contained is on the order of 109, which is manageable by state-of-the-art molecular dynamics simulations (e.g., Ref. [24]).
4. Conclusions and implications for ITER
In this paper, both smooth and ‘fuzzy’ W targets were exposed to Ne plasmas in a linear plasma device to study their sputtering behaviour. For smooth targets, crystal-orientation-dependent physical sputtering was observed, in which the (111) grains were more resilient to sputtering than the (100) grains. For the ‘fuzzy’ targets, which were produced by He plasma exposure prior to Ne plasma exposure, reduced sputtering yields up to 5 times were measured. These findings are consistent with the literature but also highlight the need for more work in the future.
Some projections for the ITER divertor/main wall performance can be made on the basis of current findings. The high sputtering yield of (110) grains and their preferential formation during recrystallization is undesirable. Consequently, the proposal to operate with higher steady-state heat loads—than the commonly quoted 10 MW/m2—by allowing for surface recrystallization1 [2] may suffer from accelerated divertor erosion and intensified plasma contamination. On a positive note, the ‘fuzzy’ surface suppresses physical sputtering very effectively. If its detrimental effects on divertor performance can be minimized, designed ‘fuzzy’ surfaces, e.g. by controlled in-situ He plasma exposure, can be leveraged to cope with energetic plasmas in fusion devices.