Introduction
High field superconducting magnets play an important role in scientific research. Nineteen Nobel Prizes, including sixteen in physics and three in chemistry, have been awarded for scientific discoveries related to either the use or generation of high magnetic fields. Seven of these have been awarded in the past twenty years. Much of the importance of high magnetic fields relates to the fundamental behavior of charged particles and their orbits around magnetic field lines; as the magnetic field increases, the radius of the particle orbit decreases, thereby allowing investigations of phenomena on smaller length scales. Specific examples of the impact of high magnetic fields on research are found in condensed matter physics, materials science, biology, chemistry, physiology and psychology [1]–​[5]. Furthermore, superconducting magnets have been an essential enabling technology for particle accelerators and colliders and play an essential role in fusion devices, including the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor [6], [7].

The development of high-field superconducting magnets is driven primarily by the development of high-field superconducting materials [8]. Early superconducting solenoids were limited by the properties of NbTi. More recently, progress in Nb3Sn conductors have driven the maximum magnetic field obtainable above 20 T. Recent examples of high-field Nb3Sn solenoids include the ultra wide-bore 900 MHz (21.1 T) Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) magnet at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL) and the 950 MHz (22.3 T) NMR magnet from Bruker. These systems demonstrate that high-field solenoids follow the development of high-field conductors quickly. Nb3Sn conductors, and the magnets in which they result, are approaching their limit in high-field performance as dictated by the upper critical field (Hc2), so it is important to assess the future of high-field superconducting conductors and magnets.

In this paper, the importance of and potential for superconducting solenoids generating magnetic fields above 25 T with high temperature superconductors (HTS) are discussed. The first part of the paper provides a few specific examples of the impact of high magnetic fields on science. The preponderance of the paper then focuses on the technological opportunities of HTS conductors and the challenges that must be overcome if higher magnetic fields are to be generated. Particular emphasis is placed on the progress and issues of HTS conductors, including Bi-Sr-Ca-Cu-O wires and tapes, Y-Ba-Cu-O coated conductors and MgB2 wires. A necessary-but-not-sufficient condition for the implementation of a new conductor is high engineering critical current density (JE), so the high-field electrical performance of HTS conductors are discussed with an emphasis on low temperature behavior in engineering forms. The potential for significant improvements in JE(B) is discussed and the essential relationships between conductor processing technologies, manufacturing scale-up issues, and magnet manufacturing are assessed.

High JE(B) HTS conductors pose engineering challenges for high performance, high-field, superconducting magnets. Very slow quench dynamics has important implications for quench detection and protection. The conductor failure modes due to quenching are not understood and the quench limits are not well defined. There are also relationships between conductor electromechanics, the fundamental limits on JE and conductor homogeneity which may also impact high-field magnet development. Furthermore, there is evidence that quench-induced conductor degradation and electromechanics may be directly coupled such that the mechanical state of the conductor influences the quench limits, and that a protected quench may reduce the conductor strain tolerance. These issues and their underlying science are discussed. Thus, this paper addresses the essential question: can a new, high-field, integrated conductor & magnet technology evolve?

SECTION II.Motivations for High-Field Solenoids
Recent advances in high magnetic field science have been propelled by the development of a series of new solenoid magnets at the NHMFL. These include the 60 T controlled pulse resistive magnet (1998), 45 T DC hybrid magnet (1999), 35 T DC resistive magnet (2003), 900 MHz NMR magnet (2004), 14.5 T ion cyclotron resonance magnet (2004) and the 90 T multi-shot pulsed magnet (2006) [9]–​[13].

One example of the benefits of high magnetic fields is in the study of quadrupolar nuclei. In this case, there is a reduction in second order broadening with increasing field and an improvement in sensitivity that scales ∼B4. So, for example, in a study of the 17O shift in methyl alpha-D-glucopyranoside (a sugar) [14], NMR studies at 830 MHz (19.6 T) show a nineteen-fold increase in sensitivity and an 84-fold increase in speed as compared to data obtained at 400 MHz (9.4 T). The signal is larger and the line width narrower. Furthermore, the small signals in the 830 MHz spectrum are spinning sidebands from the magic angle spinning, which are not resolvable at 400 MHz. Another example is found in the studies of Al2O3+B2O3 [15]. In this case, not only does the resolution significantly improve with magnetic field, but only at 25 T does it become possible to resolve the four different states of Al in the molecule. Another example from solid state NMR comes from the determination of member protein structures [16]. Consider the amino acid sequences of two membrane proteins, one of which is very short (KdpF) and one which is lengthy (Rv1861). Both are from mycobacterium tuberculosis and are potential drug targets. While the structure of the small protein can be solved, the spectra of the larger protein are too overlapped and higher fields are required to resolve the signals that provide the structural restraints; at 30 T, spectra of the larger proteins would be nearly completely resolved.

These examples represent only a few of many that can be found in chemistry, biology, physics, materials science, engineering and psychology. More detailed examples are discussed at length in the report by the Committee on Opportunities in High Magnetic Field Science (COHMAG), a Commissioned National Research Council Study [17]. COHMAG investigated the science and engineering that may be enabled by the production of higher magnetic fields and set targets for future magnet technology. Amongst the magnets targeted is a 30 T, superconducting, high resolution NMR spectrometer. This technological goal is based in part on the demonstration of a 25.05 T insert coil using Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+x (Bi2212) conductor, successfully tested in 2003 [18]. This was the first time a magnetic field greater than 25 T was generated by a superconducting material. More recently, another insert coil tested at the NHMFL generated 26.8 T using YBa2C3O7−y (YBCO) conductor [19]. Although this insert is significantly smaller in ID, OD and height, the average current density in the coil is at least double that of any previous record-setting high-field HTS insert coil. While COHMAG defines the motivation for higher field magnets, these test coils illustrate the potential of emerging HTS conductor technologies.

SECTION III.High-Field Superconducting Materials
The first metric that determines the applicability of a superconducting material is the transport critical current density as a function of magnetic field, Jc(B). To compare magnet conductor options, the engineering critical current density, JE(B), is typically used because it factors in not only the performance of the superconductor itself, but the quantity of non-superconducting materials present. Thus, JE(B)=Ic(B)/Acond, where Ic(B) is the transport critical current as a function of background magnetic field and Acond is the overall cross-section of the conductor. The conductor fill factor f is defined as the fraction of the conductor area occupied by superconductor, f=ASC/Acond.

Fig. 1 plots typical JE(B,4.2 K) data for NbTi, Nb3Sn, MgB2 and Bi2212 wires [20]. It is important to note that this data is a “snapshot in time” the conductors, and in particular MgB2 and Bi2212, continue to improve. It is clearly seen that NbTi and Nb3Sn are severely limited above 12 T and 24 T, respectively. The poor high-field performance of MgB2 wires is surprising. While MgB2 has shown significant high-field behavior in thin films via proper doping [21], this has not been replicated in bulk or wire forms and thus MgB2 cannot be considered a high-field conductor at present. If the thin-film results can be translated to wires, however, then the potential for MgB2 as a low cost, high-field conductor is significant.

Fig. 1. - $J_{E}(B,4.2\ {\rm K})$ for low temperature superconductors and one HTS conductor, Bi2212. Although differences in the definition of $A_{cond}$ may skew some values, it is evident that the performance of ${\hbox{Nb}}_{3}{\hbox{Sn}}$ decreases rapidly above 20 T and that Bi2212 has significant potential at high fields [20].

Fig. 1.
JE(B,4.2 K) for low temperature superconductors and one HTS conductor, Bi2212. Although differences in the definition of Acond may skew some values, it is evident that the performance of Nb3Sn decreases rapidly above 20 T and that Bi2212 has significant potential at high fields [20].

Show All

A. High-Field Performance of HTS Conductors
While Fig. 1 plots the transport behavior of low temperature superconductors in comparison with Bi2212, Fig. 2 plots JE(B) to 45 T for Bi2212 conductors circa 2003–2004 and YBCO coated conductors circa 2005. This previously unpublished data is the only existing data at 45 T, however, and remains valuable as such. Data for two types of Bi2212 conductors are shown, round wires (RW, 0.8 mm diameter) and the wide (4 mm), thin (0.2 mm) tapes used in the 25.05 T insert coil. Somewhat surprisingly, the Bi2212 round wire performs as well as the “good direction” (B∥ab) of the tape. This is not likely to be an intrinsic effect but rather due to filament-size effects, where the RW has a much higher filament count (>500 versus 19) and much smaller filaments than the tape conductor. There is a factor of four difference in the two orientations for the Bi2212 tape and a factor of three difference for the two orientations for the YBCO, illustrating the intrinsic electromagnetic anisotropy in these conductors.

Fig. 2. - $J_{E}(B,4.2\ {\rm K})$ of Bi2212 wires and tapes and YBCO coated conductors in a background magnetic field up to 45 T. Although these conductors are now 2–4 years old and have been surpassed in performance by more recent versions, this is the only data available at such high fields and shows the weak dependence of $J_{E}$ on $B$ to fields well beyond those envisioned in superconducting magnets in the next decade. Note that the electric field criterion is 5 $\mu{\hbox{V/cm}}$. This is not applicable to the design of magnets, but is a limitation of the electrically noisy environment of the 45 T Hybrid magnet.

Fig. 2.
JE(B,4.2 K) of Bi2212 wires and tapes and YBCO coated conductors in a background magnetic field up to 45 T. Although these conductors are now 2–4 years old and have been surpassed in performance by more recent versions, this is the only data available at such high fields and shows the weak dependence of JE on B to fields well beyond those envisioned in superconducting magnets in the next decade. Note that the electric field criterion is 5 μV/cm. This is not applicable to the design of magnets, but is a limitation of the electrically noisy environment of the 45 T Hybrid magnet.

Show All

Fig. 3. - $J_{E}(B,4.2\ {\rm K})$ of circa 2007 Bi2212, Bi2223 and YBCO conductors in a magnetic field up to 25 T. In comparison with the data shown in Fig. 2 the quality of HTS conductors has improved significantly.

Fig. 3.
JE(B,4.2 K) of circa 2007 Bi2212, Bi2223 and YBCO conductors in a magnetic field up to 25 T. In comparison with the data shown in Fig. 2 the quality of HTS conductors has improved significantly.

Show All

More recent transport measurement results to 25 T on circa 2007 conductors are shown in Fig. 3, with cross-sectional images of the conductors shown in Figs. 4 and 5, [22]–​[24]. In this case, the y-axis range is a factor of five greater than in Fig. 2. In Fig. 3, only data for the B∥c (“bad-direction”) for YBCO is shown; the critical current for B∥ab is at least four times as high. Thus, YBCO JE(B) performance has increased by about a factor of five relative to the data in Fig. 2 and now surpasses that of Bi2212. These improvements illustrate the significant improvement in understanding YBCO developed from intense study during the past ten years. One of the most important issues to be resolved is that of the thickness dependence, in which the Jc of the YBCO layer decreased significantly as the layer thickness increased. This is now understood as a combination of two factors, the through-thickness varying porosity (density) which is modeled effectively via Effective Medium Theory, and flux pinning [25]–​[27]. As a result, Jc (77 K, s.f.) ∼4–5 MA/cm2 is now obtained in thick YBCO layers. Future improvements in self-field JE are not likely to be driven by improvements in Jc, but rather in thicker YBCO layers and thinner packaging. As the ability to tailor flux-pinning defects continues to improve, the ability to design the conductor for the magnetic field required by the application is likely to evolve. Furthermore, because recent breakthroughs in magnetic flux pinning engineering affect both the magnetic field dependence of Jc and electromagnetic anisotropy, the field dependence of the YBCO data in Fig. 2 is not likely to result in a universal curve for YBCO and present and future YBCO conductors are likely to behave somewhat differently. More details on YBCO conductor manufacturing can be found elsewhere [28].

Fig. 4. - Cross-sections of multifilamentary Bi2212 round wires and tape before heat treatment. Shown are (a) single and (b) double restacked round wires from two different U.S. manufacturers and the (c) tape conductor used in the 25.05 T insert.

Fig. 4.
Cross-sections of multifilamentary Bi2212 round wires and tape before heat treatment. Shown are (a) single and (b) double restacked round wires from two different U.S. manufacturers and the (c) tape conductor used in the 25.05 T insert.

Show All

Fig. 5. - Micrograph of the edge of a YBCO coated conductors from a U.S. manufacturer. Note that the superconductor fill factor, $f\sim 1\%$, which is typical of YBCO coated conductor from all manufacturers world-wide. Despite this, however, because the superconductor $J_{c}$ is very high, the $J_{E}$ is also very high.

Fig. 5.
Micrograph of the edge of a YBCO coated conductors from a U.S. manufacturer. Note that the superconductor fill factor, f∼1%, which is typical of YBCO coated conductor from all manufacturers world-wide. Despite this, however, because the superconductor Jc is very high, the JE is also very high.

Show All

Fig. 3 also shows improvement in the Bi2212 RW relative to Fig. 2; since the collection of the data in Fig. 3, Bi2212 RW has improved even further [29]–​[31]. While improvements in Bi2212 wires are less dramatic than in YBCO, Bi2212 has never received the level of R&D that YBCO has received, and as a result a thorough understanding of Bi2212 has not yet developed. Significant improvements are anticipated in the near future as the research focus intensifies. For example, the post heat-treatment cross-sections of the highest JE conductors show microstructures that are dominated by interfilament bridging [30]–​[32]. This is seen in Fig. 6, which shows optical micrographs before and after heat treatment. The heat treated wire has extensive interfilament bridging and very high JE (∼2 kA/mm2 at 4.2 K, s.f.). Images of this type, which have been characteristic of Bi2212 from many manufacturers for over a decade, raise fundamental questions regarding where the current flows in Bi2212 multifilamentary conductors. Other significant unanswered questions include: what are the microscopic current limiting mechanisms in Bi2212 conductors? Why is round wire capable of high, isotropic JE? As these questions are answered and Bi2212 is better understood, significant improvements in JE are expected.

Fig. 6. - Optical micrographs of Bi2212 wire before (left) and after (right) heat treatment, showing significant bridging between filaments after heat treatment. The conductor on the right has $J_{E}\sim 2\ {\hbox{kA/mm}}^{2}$.

Fig. 6.
Optical micrographs of Bi2212 wire before (left) and after (right) heat treatment, showing significant bridging between filaments after heat treatment. The conductor on the right has JE∼2 kA/mm2.

Show All

B. Implications for High-Field Superconducting Magnets
The data in Figs. 1–​3, as well as similar progress by other HTS conductor manufacturers [32]–​[34], illustrate three particularly important points. Firstly, the performance of HTS conductors continues to improve and further improvements are anticipated. Secondly, while Bi2212 and YBCO are demonstrated in insert coils to fields at or just above 25 T, conductor JE(B) is sufficient for magnets to at least 45 T. Thus, if the short-sample JE(B) performance is replicated in coils, electrical transport is not likely to be the performance-limiting factor. This is notably different from NbTi and Nb3Sn magnets. Lastly, from the JE(B) perspective, YBCO appears to be the best high-field conductor. Bi2212 remains of great interest, however, because it is the only round wire option beyond Nb3Sn, and thus does not have to address issues related to anisotropic behavior that can strongly influence solenoid design [35], [36]. Furthermore, for high energy physics applications, round wires offer attractive options for cabling [37]. Lastly, one notices in Fig. 3 that Bi2223 has properties that are comparable to Bi2212. Bi2223, however, is not considered further because it is unlikely to have a low temperature, high-field niche. If tape conductor is acceptable, then Bi2223 is not competitive with YBCO. Thus, YBCO and Bi2212 remain the primary options for high-field magnets.

SECTION IV.Engineering Issues for High-Field HTS Magnets
There remain significant engineering issues that must be addressed before high-field HTS magnets become commonplace. The first is conductor availability in long lengths and sufficient quantities. This is not an intrinsic engineering problem but rather a question of commercial scale-up requiring sufficient market pull. HTS development has been dictated by conductor push, but the investment required for scale-up requires a market for the final product. The push for high-field solenoids [17] and the quest for a high energy collider beyond the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) may provide the necessary pull in the near term. It is important to note that it was the market pull of the Tevatron, followed by the MRI industry and the LHC, that provided the market pull for NbTi. The conductor development programs of the high energy physics community, and more recently the LARP program, have helped provide market pull for Nb3Sn [38].

A. Conductor Processing and Magnet Manufacturing
As increasing quantities of HTS conductors become available, it is important to evaluate magnet manufacturing options. Traditionally there are two approaches: React-&-Wind (R&W) and Wind-&-React (W&R). R&W has the advantage of separating the conductor processing from the magnet manufacturing. Thus, materials to be incorporated into the magnet are not exposed to the conductor heat treatment. with R&W, however, the conductor experiences significant bending strain due to winding into the magnet form. For small-bore, high-field magnets, the bending strain can be significant and strain management is an important and often performance-limiting issue [39], [40]. Thus, R&W is limited to magnets that are not strain limited. NbTi magnets, while not technically R&W because there is not a “reaction” step, are wound into magnets after conductor manufacture is complete and the bending strains associated with winding are accommodated in the design similar to R&W systems. Alternatively, with W&R manufacturing the magnet is formed in its final geometry, including the incorporation of turn-to-turn insulation and co-wound reinforcement, before final heat treatment. The bending strain is released during heat treatment because the superconducting phase is formed after packaging and in its final geometry. This approach is typically used for Nb3Sn magnets because of its strain sensitivity. For Nb3Sn, insulation and reinforcement must be compatible with a heat treatment at ∼700∘C in an inert atmosphere.

Decisions regarding coil manufacturing are strongly influenced by conductor processing requirements. YBCO conductors are manufactured via thin film processing technologies that are incompatible with W&R manufacturing. Thus, all YBCO magnets will be R&W and magnet design must account for bending strain. The electromechanical behavior of YBCO is discussed later.

Bi2212 processing is significantly more complicated than YBCO and Nb3Sn and Bi2212 coil manufacturing remains a significant challenge [29], [41]–​[43]. Bi2212 conductors are manufactured via a conventional powder-in-tube approach with Ag and Ag-alloy tubes. The approach is conceptually similar to multifilamentary NbTi and Nb3Sn, with wire drawing and restacking to produce the multifilamentary cross-sections seen in Fig. 4. Like Nb3Sn, Bi2212 requires a high temperature heat treatment after final deformation to produce high JE(B). Unlike Nb3Sn, however, the Bi2212 heat treatment must be performed in oxygen (typically 100%) and the peak temperature (Tmax) must be controlled within a few °C. A typical heat treatment schedule is shown in Fig. 7 where Tmax∼890∘C. Control of Tmax is vital because it must be above the peritectic melting point of Bi2212 such that significant liquid phase is formed from which the high Jc Bi2212 grows during resolidification. If Tmax is too low, insufficient melting occurs and performance is poor. If Tmax is too high, a number of problems can result in reduced JE, including phase separation and increased leakage of the Bi2212 through the sheath. Typical Ic(Tmax) is seen in Fig. 8, showing that Ic increases by 275% as Tmax increases from 886°C to 887°C, but decreases by ∼20% from 888°C to 890°C.

Fig. 7. - Conventional $T-t$ heat treatment profile for Bi2212 conductors.

Fig. 7.
Conventional T−t heat treatment profile for Bi2212 conductors.

Show All

Fig. 8. - Typical $I_{c}$ versus $T_{max}$ for Bi2212 conductors, illustrating the importance of peritectic melting.

Fig. 8.
Typical Ic versus Tmax for Bi2212 conductors, illustrating the importance of peritectic melting.

Show All

Successful Bi2212 insert coils have been manufactured using both R&W and W&R manufacturing [35], [44]–​[47]. Due to the complexity of the Bi2212 heat treatment, from a manufacturing perspective R&W is preferred. As discussed later, however, Bi2212 conductors are strain sensitive and the bending strain associated with R&W is unacceptably limiting for high-field magnets. W&R manufacturing has proven to be a significant challenge for Bi2212 magnets, and as the size of coils has increased, coil performance relative to short-sample conductor performance has decreased. This is likely to be related to inhomogeneous temperature and/or oxygen distributions during heat treatment. If the temperature is inhomogeneous, then either parts of the coil do not reach Tmax or other parts may either be overheated or held at Tmax for too long. Recent coil studies indicate that reducing Tmax and increasing the time at Tmax, tm, may offer improvement. If the oxygen distribution in the coil is inhomogeneous during heat treatment, inhomogeneous melting may result because the melt temperature decreases as pO2 decreases [48], so oxygen-deficient sections of the coil may over-melt, or undesirable phase assemblages in regions of the magnet with insufficient oxygen during resolidification may result. Thus, obtaining a heat treatment that is uniform in temperature and pO2, such that the innermost sections of the coil are properly heat treated without over-processing the outermost regions, remains a significant challenge. Furthermore, because oxygen is required for Bi2212 processing, the options for insulation, coil former and reinforcement are limited. At best, current insulation options are undesirably thick, reducing the overall coil current density. At worst, the insulation enhances conductor leakage and interacts with the oxides that escape the wire [49]. This problem has plagued W&R Bi2212 conductors and coils for over fifteen years. Illustrations of leakage are shown in Fig. 9; (a) illustrates the path of molten oxide through the Ag sheath to the conductor edge and (b) shows a small W&R coil with a number of leakage spots randomly arrayed on the coil surface. A recent change from macor to inconel may significantly reduce leakage, however, and the complex chemistry of Ag, molten Bi2212, insulation and the coil former in oxygen is an important topic of Bi2212 R&D. Fig. 10 shows Ic(B) results for two coils like that shown in Fig. 9, illustrating that progress in minimizing coil leakage is being made but that the effects of leakage are significant [50].

Fig. 9. - (a) Cross-sectional SEM micrograph from a Bi2212 wire removed from a small test coil, showing the path of core leakage through the Ag and AgX sheaths, and (b), a typical leaky Bi2212 test coil on a macor coil former. Note that coils such as these typically carry $\sim$60% of the current predicted by short-sample $I_{c}$ behavior [50].

Fig. 9.
(a) Cross-sectional SEM micrograph from a Bi2212 wire removed from a small test coil, showing the path of core leakage through the Ag and AgX sheaths, and (b), a typical leaky Bi2212 test coil on a macor coil former. Note that coils such as these typically carry ∼60% of the current predicted by short-sample Ic behavior [50].

Show All

Fig. 10. - $I_{c}(B)$ for two test coils like that shown in Fig. 9(b). Note that the coil with less conductor and no leaks has $\sim$25% higher performance than the large coil with one leak [50].

Fig. 10.
Ic(B) for two test coils like that shown in Fig. 9(b). Note that the coil with less conductor and no leaks has ∼25% higher performance than the large coil with one leak [50].

Show All

An alternative approach to Bi2212 coil manufacturing has been proposed that attempts to avoid the pitfalls of both R&W and W&R manufacturing. This approach, known as “React-Wind-Sinter” (RWS) and illustrated in Fig. 11, splits the heat treatment into two separate steps [30], [31], [51], [52]. The “react” step is performed on a large heat treatment mandrel as if R&W were being used. Thus, the key partial-melt step is performed with the conductor not in a tightly wound geometry and oxygen and temperature uniformity are less challenging. The conductor is then cooled to room temperature, the coil wound into final form (like W&R), and the heat treatment completed primarily within the Bi2212 solid state. Fig. 12 shows Ic(B) data for Bi2212 round wires heat treated with the process shown in Fig. 11 and the conventional process shown in Fig. 7 with identical Tmax. The RWS heat treatment results in a 30% increase in performance. Results like those in Fig. 12 and other studies [30], [31], [51], [52] show that RWS may not only avoid many of the problems with R&W and W&R Bi2212 manufacturing but also significantly improve Bi2212 performance. These results illustrate that Bi2212 processing and magnet manufacturing remain far from optimized.

Fig. 11. - Typical split heat treatment used in the React-Wind-Sinter approach to Bi2212 coil manufacturing. Note that $T_{max}$ remains the same as in conventional processing.

Fig. 11.
Typical split heat treatment used in the React-Wind-Sinter approach to Bi2212 coil manufacturing. Note that Tmax remains the same as in conventional processing.

Show All

Fig. 12. - $I_{c}$ versus magnetic field for RWS (upper curve) and conventional heat treatment (lower curve) Bi2212 round wires. RWS processing results in $\sim$30% improvement in conductor performance [30], [31], [52].

Fig. 12.
Ic versus magnetic field for RWS (upper curve) and conventional heat treatment (lower curve) Bi2212 round wires. RWS processing results in ∼30% improvement in conductor performance [30], [31], [52].

Show All

B. Electromechanical Behavior
High-field magnets intrinsically have large Lorentz forces (FL) because FL∼JBR, where J is the overall current density, B is the magnetic field generated and R is a typical scale-length for the magnet size. Since typically B∼J (and in general, high J is desired for reduced cost), FL scales with B2. Thus, stress and strain management are important issues in the design of high-field conductors and magnets [39], [40]. It is also important to note that although high-field solenoids have very large forces, the simplicity of the geometry relative to other magnet applications (e.g. dipole magnets) simplifies the mechanics. Thus, while solenoid design is primarily concerned with mitigating the effects of hoop tension, other magnet geometries also must be concerned with bending modes and compression. All superconducting magnets must consider differences in thermal expansion between the superconductor and other materials present in the magnet. Furthermore, as discussed previously, the conductor electromechanical behavior influences magnet manufacturing decisions.

In the case of YBCO, magnets will be constructed using R&W manufacturing, so magnet design must consider the bending strain associated with winding, thermal strain and Lorentz forces. The conductor architecture, with a very thin YBCO layer sandwiched by thick metallic layers, implies that the bending strain in the YBCO layer may be relatively small, but within the metallic layers it can be significant. One could conceivably design an asymmetric conductor such that the YBCO layer has significant pre-compression from winding, though this may overly strain the stabilizer or impact other design issues, such as quench protection. A number of reports show that, to first order, the electromechanical behavior of YBCO coated conductors are dominated by the Ni-alloy substrates (Ni-W and Hastelloy) [53]–​[58]. As a result, conductor strength and strain tolerance can be a conductor design variable, although considerations that determine conductor JE are likely to dominate the substrate selection. In general, YBCO coated conductors, and in particular those with Hastelloy substrates, are strong and sufficiently strain tolerant for high-field magnet applications. For example, the 26.8 T insert coil was not strain or stress limited. Fig. 13 shows the stress-strain and Ic-strain behavior of a typical YBCO coated conductor; similar data for other architectural variants are found in the literature. Interestingly, data from the most recent conductors has shown a reversible effect not seen in Fig. 13 nor in earlier work of most authors [57], [58]. This difference is attributed to improvements in the microstructure of the YBCO layer that eliminated the multiplicity of current paths that likely existed in earlier conductors. For magnets other than solenoids the dominant mechanical limits may be bending, compression, or tension normal to the conductor face, and issues related to interfacial shear and debonding may become important considerations. In these situations, the specifics of the conductor architectures and their manufacturing are likely to play more significant roles.

Fig. 13. - Typical $I_{c}(\varepsilon)$ and $\sigma-\varepsilon$ behavior for YBCO coated conductor [55].

Fig. 13.
Typical Ic(ε) and σ−ε behavior for YBCO coated conductor [55].

Show All

For Bi2212 conductors the electromechanical behavior is more complicated and is influenced by the behavior of the Ag and Ag-alloy sheaths, the microstructure of the Bi2212 filaments and differential thermal contraction [59]–​[63]. In general, because of the relative lack of strength and stiffness of Ag and Ag alloys, Bi2212 conductors are highly strain sensitive. As a result, it is unlikely that future Bi2212 high-field solenoids will be R&W. Note that the 25.05 T insert used R&W manufacturing, but in that case the Bi2212 conductor was thin tape which experiences less bending strain than round wires. The advantages of round wire, e.g. isotropic electromagnetic behavior, increased JE, smaller filaments, lower insulation volume fraction, etc., are pushing the development of round wires rather than tapes, so Bi2212 coil development is focused on round wire technologies. It is also difficult to find advantages of Bi2212 tape over YBCO tape, so if Bi2212 is to be competitive, it will be as a round wire.

Fig. 14. - Typical $I_{c}(\varepsilon)$ and $\sigma-\varepsilon$ behavior for Bi2212 tape conductor [62].

Fig. 14.
Typical Ic(ε) and σ−ε behavior for Bi2212 tape conductor [62].

Show All

Fig. 14 plots typical stress-strain and Ic-strain data for Bi2212 tape conductors [62]. The scatter in the Ic-strain data is indicative of the conductor inhomogeneity, which has more recently been quantified using Weibull statistics [63]. The Weibull analysis shows that there are clear differences between the mechanical and electrical failure within Bi2212 tapes, which is indicative of a strong role for microstructural inhomogeneities within the Bi2212 filaments. As seen in Fig. 15, the Weibull analysis shows significant scatter in the electromechanical performance of the tapes. While the scatter illustrates the conductor inhomogeneity, the relatively high reliabilities found in strained conductors are significant. For example, consider the data for ε=0.349%, which is the roughly the critical strain (εc). The reliability at I=378 A (the unstrained batch-average Ic) is ∼0.30, indicating that ∼30% of the conductor maintains Ic=378 A at this strain. If one considers I∼190 A (50% of the original batch average), the reliability is over 80%. Furthermore, it is interesting to consider the trends in the ε=0.25% curve. For reliabilities above 0.50, the curve deviates only slightly from the zero-strain data, indicating that there is no effect on transport; i.e., all of the Bi2212 that carries current is insensitive to this level of strain. At high current (reliability ∼0.10), the ε=0.25% and ε=0.349% curves converge, indicating that there is portion of current-carrying Bi2212 that is particularly strain-tolerant. These are clear indicators that there is significant potential to improve the electromechanical behavior of Bi2212 through improved Bi2212 microstructure. Thus, as JE increases through improved understanding of Bi2212, improved electromechanical performance is also anticipated. Not surprisingly, recent data indicates that the highest performing Bi2212 round wires also have significantly higher εc (∼0.6%) than the Bi2212 tapes described in the Weibull study. It will be interesting to see if the improved εc corresponds to more homogeneous behavior as defined by statistical analysis.

Fig. 15. - Weibull reliability distributions for critical current at fixed levels of strain in Bi2212 tape conductor [63]. The conductor had an average $I_{c}=378\ {\hbox{A}}$ and a critical strain of 0.349%.

Fig. 15.
Weibull reliability distributions for critical current at fixed levels of strain in Bi2212 tape conductor [63]. The conductor had an average Ic=378 A and a critical strain of 0.349%.

Show All

C. Quench Protection
Like the Lorentz force, the stored energy in a magnet scales with B2 and the size of the magnet. Thus, high-field solenoids are high energy and high energy density systems and effective quench protection is essential for safe operation, particularly when system cost on the order of $10 M is anticipated. In general, quench protection in HTS magnets is qualitatively similar to that in low temperature superconductor (LTS) magnets, requiring detection of a disturbance or normal zone, a determination if the disturbance is unstable, and the triggering of the protection systems to prevent damage to the magnet. The basic physics and general mathematical formulations that describe quench phenomena in HTS magnets are the same as that for LTS magnets, but because of significant differences in the material properties, quench protection in HTS systems may prove to be quite different and more challenging than in LTS systems.

The quench behavior of Bi2212 and YBCO short samples and small coils has been reported [64]–​[81]. While the results vary with the specifics of the experimental approach and conductor architecture, a few general themes are consistently found. Firstly, HTS conductors have large energy margin and high heat loads may be tolerable. This is likely to be more important for high energy physics and/or fusion magnet applications. Secondly, normal zone propagation is very slow; typically two orders of magnitude slower than Nb3Sn. Lastly, HTS conductors can be damaged by quenching and the failure limits, which in turn dictate the requirements of the protection system, are not yet quantified in detail. The failure limits are likely to be dependent on the conductor architecture and thus significant differences between Bi2212 and YBCO may be seen. In fact, there may be significant differences between YBCO manufacturers because of differences in the ways the conductors are packaged.

A number of studies have investigated quenching in YBCO conductors and coils [65]–​[71], [74], [75], [79]–​[81]. The number of potentially important variables is significant and makes comparisons of results difficult. One experimental variable is the mechanism by which quenching is induced. In one approach, quenches are initiated by taking advantage of inhomogeneities in the conductor Ic. The transport current is fixed such that it is below the end-to-end Ic but above that of local “weak-spots”. Joule heating causes weak-spots to become hot-spots. An alternative approach involves pulsing an external heater that is mounted to the conductor. In this way, the conductor transport current is a freely selected variable, but the total energy into the conductor is more difficult to determine because some of the energy is dissipated in the material (epoxy) that attaches the heater to the conductor and in the surrounding atmosphere. The latter approach has been used to study architectural variations in YBCO coated conductors, the performance of Bi2212 tapes and wires, and small coils of each material. Typically, these experiments result in data like that seen in Figs. 16 and 17, which show the voltage and temperature versus time at different locations within a conductor [72]. This data is used to determine if the conductor or coil quenched or recovered, and in the case of a quench, the normal zone propagation velocity. The long timescales on the x-axes of these figures are indicative of the slow quench dynamics in HTS materials.

Fig. 16. - Voltage versus time during a typical quench propagation experiment on an HTS conductor. V15, V16, V17, V30 and V31 refer to voltage taps along the length of the conductor. $\Delta{\rm t}$ refers to the propagation time of the normal zone from one voltage tap set to the next; thus the propagation velocity is the distance between the taps divided by $\Delta{\rm t}$.

Fig. 16.
Voltage versus time during a typical quench propagation experiment on an HTS conductor. V15, V16, V17, V30 and V31 refer to voltage taps along the length of the conductor. Δt refers to the propagation time of the normal zone from one voltage tap set to the next; thus the propagation velocity is the distance between the taps divided by Δt.

Show All

Fig. 17. - Temperature-time data corresponding to the voltage-time data shown in Fig. 16. The different curves represent different locations along the length of the conductor; the arrows illustrate normal zone propagation.

Fig. 17.
Temperature-time data corresponding to the voltage-time data shown in Fig. 16. The different curves represent different locations along the length of the conductor; the arrows illustrate normal zone propagation.

Show All

Fig. 18 shows self-field normal zone propagation results for three YBCO coated conductor architectures like those shown in Fig. 5. In this experiment, the conductors are identical except for variations in the outer metal layers. Here, “Cu-Cu” refers to a conductor with Cu on each side, “Cu-SS” refers to a conductor with Cu on one side and stainless steel on the other, and “SS-SS” refers to a conductor with stainless steel on both sides. It is interesting to note that there is little difference between the “Cu-Cu” and the “Cu-SS”, indicating that once a certain Cu thickness is present, additional Cu does not affect propagation. There is a significant increase in the propagation velocity in the absence of Cu (“SS-SS” conductor). Thus, if quench propagation is a limiting condition for protection, there may be advantages to reducing the amount of Cu present in favor of a SS or another stabilizer. More generally, conductor optimization may now include a range of options for stabilizer that consider both the requirements for quench protection and mechanical strength.

Fig. 18. - Normal zone propagation velocity versus $I/I_{c}$ for YBCO coated conductors of various architectures at two different temperatures. The data is obtained from voltage-time data similar to that seen in Fig. 16.

Fig. 18.
Normal zone propagation velocity versus I/Ic for YBCO coated conductors of various architectures at two different temperatures. The data is obtained from voltage-time data similar to that seen in Fig. 16.

Show All

Fig. 19. - Normal zone propagation in a YBCO coated conductor and a pancake coil made of the same conductor. Longitudinal propagation in the coil is about half that of the single conductor. Transverse propagation is a factor of $\sim$20–35 slower.

Fig. 19.
Normal zone propagation in a YBCO coated conductor and a pancake coil made of the same conductor. Longitudinal propagation in the coil is about half that of the single conductor. Transverse propagation is a factor of ∼20–35 slower.

Show All

Recent coil measurements that under certain circumstances quench propagation may be faster than previously measured and that there may be two “stages” to such propagation, including an initial stage with slow propagation, followed by a second stage with much faster propagation. This remains unconfirmed, however, and further study is required.

It is also important to consider the temperature and atmosphere dependences of the propagation velocity. The data shown in Fig. 18 are at 50 K and 60 K in vacuum, and the velocity increases as temperature decreases. Recent measurements at 4.2 K in liquid helium show roughly a factor of two increase in velocity relative to the 50 K results. Thus, for example, at I∼50%Ic in a SS-SS conductor, the propagation velocity reaches ∼90 mm/s. This is the fastest propagation reported in any HTS conductor, but remains significantly slower than Nb3Sn and NbTi conductors. Based solely on temperature effects, one would expect a larger increase; the effectiveness of helium cooling at the surface, as compared to the experiments in vacuum, slows the propagation.

It is also pertinent to consider the quench propagation behavior in a coil as opposed to short samples to determine if short sample measurements are relevant to coil design. Fig. 19 compares the propagation results for the Cu-Cu conductor shown in Fig. 18 with results from a similar self-field experiment on a pancake coil made of the same conductor. The propagation in the coil is slower than the single conductor. One may have expected the opposite due to the effects of self-field, but instead the greater thermal mass of the coil dominates the behavior. It is also interesting to note that transverse propagation in the coil is ∼20X slower than longitudinal propagation. Large differences between longitudinal and transverse propagation velocity are also reported in [80].

Fig. 20. - Evidence of degradation of a YBCO coated conductor due to a quench. The upper curve is the hot-spot temperature versus location in the conductor during the quench experiment. The lower two curves show $I_{c}$ versus location before and after the quench. Degraded performance correlates directly with the hot-spot temperature. The section of conductor indicated by the oval, which did not show a reduction in $I_{c}$, was later found to have a reduced critical strain [82].

Fig. 20.
Evidence of degradation of a YBCO coated conductor due to a quench. The upper curve is the hot-spot temperature versus location in the conductor during the quench experiment. The lower two curves show Ic versus location before and after the quench. Degraded performance correlates directly with the hot-spot temperature. The section of conductor indicated by the oval, which did not show a reduction in Ic, was later found to have a reduced critical strain [82].

Show All

There is recent data on the quench behavior of Bi2212 tapes and round wires in liquid helium using an otherwise similar experimental approach as the YBCO results [76]–​[78]. In this case, propagation velocities ∼20–30 mm/s are found in tapes and ∼60–80 mm/s in round wires. The difference is believed to be primarily related to the JE differences in the two conductors; as JE increases, so does the propagation velocity.

In any superconducting magnet, the protection system is designed to prevent superconductor degradation due to a quench, and experiments on YBCO and Bi2212 conductors and coils have that degradation is possible. A typical example for YBCO is seen in Fig. 20 [82]. Here, the upper curve shows the hot-spot temperature during the quench and the lower two curves show Ic before (upper) and after (lower) the quench. from this and other similar experiments, it appears that the safe operational limit during the quench of a YBCO coil can be either a hot-spot temperature limit, a peak temperature gradient limit, or a dT/dt limit (thermal shock). It is also important to note that subsequent electromechanical measurements on a section of this conductor that experienced no reduction in Ic due to the quench [the section within the oval on Fig. 20)] did show a significant reduction in εc [82]. This indicates that the quench protection limits may not be derived solely from reduced electrical performance, but that instead a new metric that accounts for this behavior will be required. This requires further study.

Fig. 21. - Quench degradation in Bi2212 tape conductors due to quenching. Each curve refers to a different location within one conductor. It is seen that heat pulses that do not induce quenching also do not induce degradation. Quenches that do induce quenching, however, also degrade most of the conductor.

Fig. 21.
Quench degradation in Bi2212 tape conductors due to quenching. Each curve refers to a different location within one conductor. It is seen that heat pulses that do not induce quenching also do not induce degradation. Quenches that do induce quenching, however, also degrade most of the conductor.

Show All

A systematic study of quench degradation in Bi2212 tapes and wires indicates that degradation in these conductors correlates with conductor performance. Fig. 21 plots Ic versus Run # for Bi2212 tapes, where a “run” is defined as a heater pulse that may or may not induce a quench. If the heat pulse does not induce a quench, then the pulse amplitude is increased in the next run. This process is repeated until a quench is obtained. This figure illustrates that no degradation occurs for heat pulses that do not result in a quench, but that every time a quench does result, the conductor performance is degraded. This was seen consistently for Bi2212 tapes. Fig. 22 shows results from a similar experiment on a Bi2212 round wire. In this case, it was found that the conductor could experience a quench and not necessarily experience degradation, as was the case with YBCO. By varying the length of the heater and the duration and amplitude of the heat pulses, the relative effects of the hot-spot temperature (Tpeak), temperature gradient (dT/dx) and rate of temperature change (dT/dt) on the quench degradation were assessed and preliminary operational limits to prevent degradation were determined. These are summarized in Table I. While these values are considered preliminary, they illustrate that the Bi2212 round wires are more tolerant than the tape conductors. This is consistent with the higher εc measured in Bi2212 round wires than in Bi2212 tape conductors.

Fig. 22. - Quench degradation in a Bi2212 round wire. Each section refers to a different location within one tape (V18 is end-to-end). with Bi2212 round wires, quench degradation is more difficult to induce than in Bi2212 tapes and is also more localized within the wire.

Fig. 22.
Quench degradation in a Bi2212 round wire. Each section refers to a different location within one tape (V18 is end-to-end). with Bi2212 round wires, quench degradation is more difficult to induce than in Bi2212 tapes and is also more localized within the wire.

Show All

Table I Limits to Avoid Quench Degradation in Bi2212 Conductors
Table - Limits to Avoid Quench Degradation in Bi2212 Conductors

SECTION V.Summary and Conclusion
The development of high-field superconducting solenoids is being driven by the demands of scientific research. As Nb3Sn reaches its fundamental high-field limits, new conductor and magnet technologies are required. Emerging HTS conductors are poised to fill this need and their progress indicates the potential for generating magnetic fields significantly higher than previously envisioned. Large Jc(45 T) has been measured and insert coils above 25 T have been demonstrated.

At present it remains unclear which HTS conductor will emerge as the preferred option for high-field magnets. Just as high-field LTS magnets typically take advantage of both NbTi and Nb3Sn, one can envision high-field HTS magnets with both YBCO and Bi2212 sections. YBCO has higher Jc, JE and mechanical strength, and is well understood. YBCO also has design flexibility in the selection of stabilizer, indicating that it may be possible to optimize the conductor mechanical and thermal behaviors for strength and quench protection, and in nanoinclusions for optimization of the electrical behavior for specific magnets. YBCO is limited, however, to wide tape geometries and at present has a fill factor ∼1%.

The implementation of Bi2212 poses many challenges due to high temperature heat treatment in oxygen and relatively poor strain tolerance. Bi2212 is available, however, as an isotropic round wire which may offer significant benefits and a 30–40% fill factor. Furthermore, there is no intrinsic reason that Jc in YBCO should be significantly higher than in Bi2212. Thus, significant improvements in Bi2212 may be forthcoming as the research focus on this material increases. In comparing Bi2212 round wires and tapes, it is seen that the round wires have higher Jc, higher JE, increased strain tolerance and improve quench tolerance. Although these are only a correlation at present, it is likely that these improvements are all the result of reduced filament size and improved microstructural characteristics. Thus, it is anticipated that as Bi2212 becomes better understood at the microstructural level, that all of these performance metrics will improve further.

In both YBCO and Bi2212 magnets, slow quench propagation velocity and high energy margin imply that HTS coils will be very stable and that quenching may be unlikely. The situation may be more complicated, however, in that the slow propagation does not necessarily imply that there is not a large hot-spot temperature, and a coil could be damaged without a traditional quench. It is interesting to note that the maximum hot-spot temperatures shown in Table I are higher than those typically allowed for LTS magnets. Thus, while the slow propagation may indicate that more time is available for active protection, it also implies that detection will be the most significant challenge [80]. Detection depends upon obtaining a measurable and distinguishable voltage over a significant length of conductor. Without propagation, a sufficient voltage may not be detected before damage is initiated. Note that voltage is a length-averaged quantity (more precisely, it is the integral of the electrical field over a length) and that two vastly different electric field profiles can result in the same end-to-end voltage. Conductor degradation, however, is the result of local conditions. Due to slow propagation, T(x) and V(x) in HTS coils are much more peaked than in LTS coils, so quench detection using a similar voltage criterion may result in damage to an HTS coil where it would not in an LTS coil. As a result, new approaches to quench detection may be required.

As HTS conductors continue to progress and the remaining problems solved, significant impact of these conductors on high-field magnets is anticipated in the years to come.