1. Introduction
Ice formation, accretion, and solidification on diverse types of surfaces and objects are a problem that affects various life sectors and needs to be solved. It is bringing many challenges to usage, performance, safety, and energy consumption (Cao et al., 2015; Barabadi et al., 2016; Jin and Virk, 2019; Veerakumar et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2022a). Usually, this situation takes place in cold climate countries that are distinguished by long frosty winter seasons, e.g., the Nordic region and Canada (Fikke et al., 2008). Icing-related research is a hot topic nowadays and researchers have developed different methods to solve or minimize the problem (Shen et al., 2019). Active de-icing approaches usually adopt physical means to remove the accreted ice and depend on steady external energy source to be in operation mode. For example, hot air has been used for wind turbine blades (Chi et al., 2024) and for aero-engine inlet guid vanes (Li et al., 2020), electrical heaters (Mohammed et al., 2019; Shiverskii et al., 2023), microwave heating (Li et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022b), ultrasonic vibration (Shen et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024), and piezoelectric actuator vibration (Awada et al., 2022; Rekuviene et al., 2024). Chemicals that keep the surface temperature above 0 °C and lower the freezing point have been also widely used to de-ice surfaces, such as glycol derivatives for aircrafts de-icing (Corsi et al., 2006; Goraj, n.d.). Although these methods are effective, but they are costly, energy consuming, bring environmental concerns and corrosive effect with the contacting components (Corsi et al., 2006; Gruber et al., 2023; Huttunen-Saarivirta et al., 2011; Liu et al., 2022). The more economical and environmentally friendly way is to use passive prevention approach that employ surface engineering to evaluate chemical and physical properties of the surfaces and manufacture surfaces that can de−/ anti-ice itself without the need for external energy or force (Esmeryan, 2020; Li and Guo, 2018).
Lowering ice adhesion strength, delaying water droplet freezing time, water droplet sliding and shedding before droplets start to freeze, all of these are strategies developed by surface engineering to fight against icing problems (Li and Guo, 2018; Nistal et al., 2023). One of the most robust and practical methods of anti-icing is to apply a coating layer on surfaces. Kreder et al. (Kreder et al., 2016) have reviewed two types of anti-icing coatings from the perspective of surface roughness, smooth or textured, and if the surface have had lubrication layer or not. Superhydrophobic surfaces (SHSs), characterized by micro/nanostructures that mimic lotus leaves, exhibit high water contact angles (WCA ≥ 150°) and low contact angle hysteresis (CAH ≤ 5°). These properties make them promising candidates for anti-icing applications, as they demonstrate low ice adhesion values (Nosonovsky et al., 2011; Huang et al., 2022). Nevertheless, these surfaces have been inadequate in restricting icing in severe environmental circumstances such as heavy snowfall, high moisture and external mechanical stresses (Li et al., 2021; Meuler et al., 2010). Because the superhydrophobic micro/nano-scale surface structure allows a penetration of microdroplets under these conditions and they can freeze inside the structure, leading to raise the ice adhesion strength (Li and Guo, 2018). Slippery liquid-infused porous surfaces (SLIPSs), which have been also inspired by nature and replicate the Nepenthes pitcher plants surface structure concept (Bohn and Federle, 2004), have deployed for many applications (Deng et al., 2020; Long et al., 2020; Asawa et al., 2021; Jing et al., 2023) and excelled in anti-icing performance (Li et al., 2023a; Li et al., 2023b; Zheng et al., 2023; Xiang et al., 2023). In a general term, SLIPS are constructed of a micro, nano, or micro/nano textured, and porous solid surface infused with a slippery lubricant that retains and locks inside the structure roughness/porosity due to capillary forces by matching solid-liquid surface energies (Wong et al., 2011). The continuous surface lubricating thin film in the SLIPS isolates the rough surface from direct contact with the coming water droplet and worked to shed it with low CAH before or after freezing (Deng et al., 2020).
Low-pressure cold spray (LPCS) process is a solid-state coating production method where melting or subsequent oxidation is not involved, as in the other thermal spray coating methods. Submicron feedstock powder particles are accelerated by a supersonic velocity with preheated and pressurized gas jet, which creates upon substrate impact a relatively dense coating. Coating deformation and adhesion occur due to the kinetic energy (high particle velocity), which makes it suitable for temperature-sensitive materials like polymers. (AlMangour, 2018; Espallargas, 2015; Winnicki et al., 2018; Kamaraj and Radhakrishnan, 2019) The LPCS system uses compressed air or nitrogen as the carrying gas with a pressure range of 5–10 bar. A preheating temperature of the gas can be selected between 20 and 650 °C and the particle velocity in the range of 300–600 m/s (Koivuluoto et al., 2008; Singh et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2022; Patel et al., 2024). Usually, in the LPCS process, a peening assistant (e.g., hard ceramic particles) is used to hammer the particles onto the substrate during the coating build-up process (Tucker, 2013).
PEEK (poly-ether-ether-ketone) is a well-known semi-crystalline aromatic thermoplastic that has linear homopolymer (repeated single monomer) with the chemical structure (-C6H4-OC6H4-O-C6H4-CO-)n. This special chemical structure gives PEEK stability in most of physical and chemical conditions. PEEK can withstand elevated temperatures up to 335 °C and has low flammability. Also, it can oppose most chemicals and radiation damages. It resists hydrolysis, has low toxic gas emission, good mechanical properties, and low friction coefficient. All the above properties make PEEK an attractive material to emerge in different fields as a moulded part and component, e.g., in aerospace, electrical, automotive, and electrical industries, but also for the preparation of composites and coatings (Kurtz, 2012; Skirbutis et al., 2018; Simonin and Liao, 2000).
The developed concept of using the LPCS coating process together with PEEK as a feedstock material was presented in our previous research work (Khammas and Koivuluoto, 2022) for producing innovative anti-icing SLIPS coating. In this present study, we continued the development work by focusing here on 1) Coating structure optimisation by adding 10 vol% of Al2O3 to PEEK powder, where we found that Al2O3 can enhance coating adhesion, 2) Coating sample side sealing to focus on surface behaviour and avoid the infused oil depletion from the sample side structures, 3) Coating and SLIPS surface characterization using surface wettability, surface roughness and surface topography to understand the oil-infusing effect and link it to the icing behaviour, and finally 4) Study the SLIPS' icephobicity by cyclic icing/de-icing testing using an icing wind tunnel (IWiT) for ice accretion and centrifugal ice adhesion tester (CAT) to measure ice adhesion strength.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Materials
PEEK powder (VESTAKEEP AR1495, Evonik Industries AG, Essen, Germany) with a mean particle size of 55 μm was used as a feedstock material to produce the LPCS coatings. The PEEK powder was mixed with 10 vol% Al2O3 powder (AMPERIT 740, Höganäs, previously H.C. Starck, Goslar, Germany) to enhance the coating adhesion to the substrate. Two different particle sizes of Al2O3 (coarse particle size of −90 + 45 μm and fine particle size of −45 + 22 μm, both are nominal particle size distributions given by supplier) were mixed with PEEK. This is –d90 + d10 particle size distribution where 90 % of particles less than 90 μm and 10 % of particles is less than 45 μm for the coarse powder and 90 % of particles is less than 45 μm and 10 % of particles is less than 22 μm for the fine powder. Stainless steel SS316L substrates were used with the dimensions of 60 mm × 30 mm × 1.5 mm. A bond layer of Al-Al2O3 (K-10-04, Obninsk Centrer for Powder Spraying, Obninsk, Russia), between the substrate and the coating was applied to increase the coating adhesion to the substrate. Silicon oil with a viscosity of 50 cSt at 25 °C (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis MO, USA) was impregnated to the porous LPCS coatings to produce SLIPS by pipette until the structure was fully covered and the extra oil was removed by a filter paper.
2.2. Coating production
LPCS spray system (Dymet 403 K, Moscow, Russia) was used for the coating production with a round steel nozzle (Ø 5 mm) and a compressed air as the carrier gas. The spraying process is accomplished by a controlled robot (ABB IRB 4400/60, ABB Robotics, Västerås, Sweden). Two composite coatings were produced from the different feedstock mixtures on the bond layer of Al-Al2O3 coating. The first type was two layers of PEEK+10 vol% Al2O3 (coarse) composite coating with pre-heating the substrate before spraying (C-PEEK11) and without pre-heating the substrate (C-PEEK12), and its corresponding SLIPS were S-PEEK11 and S-PEEK1,2 respectively. The second type of coating was two layers of PEEK+10 vol% Al2O3 (fine) coating with pre-heating (C-PEEK21) and without pre-heating of substrate (C-PEEK22) and its corresponding SLIPS were S-PEEK21 and S-PEEK2,2 respectively. Table 1. shows the sample naming and coating production procedure as well as a schematic structure arrangement is presented in Fig. 1.
Table 1. Coating sample naming and coating production procedure.

PEEK+ Al2O3(coarse)	PEEK + Al2O3 (fine)	Substrate
pre-heating	Surface type
C-PEEK11	C-PEEK21	Yes	Coating
S-PEEK11	S-PEEK21	Yes	SLIPS
C-PEEK12	C-PEEK22	No	Coating
S-PEEK12	S-PEEK22	No	SLIPS
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (103KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Schematic presentation of the coating structure arrangement.

The substrate was heated up to ∼250 °C in the case of pre-heating samples prior to the spraying using a heating element that was fixed behind the substrate sample. Pre-heating was used to increase the coating adhesion by softening the material and to enhance the mechanical interlocking (Watanabe et al., 2015). Table 2. shows LPCS process parameters for coatings production.
Table 2. LPCS coating parameters.

Sample	Pre-heating temperature of air (°C)	Air pressure (bar)	Spray distance (mm)	Moving speed (mm/s)	Step size (mm)
C-PEEK11
C-PEEK12
C-PEEK21
C-PEEK22	330	4.2	10	50	1
Al + Al2O3 bond layer	540	6	10	50	1
After coating production, porous structures were oil-infused to functioning as SLIPS. For further SLIPS structural design and icing behaviour optimization, S-PEEK21 and S-PEEK 22 were side-sealed with glue (Epoxy RAPID, Bostik, Helsingborg, Sweden) to prevent the oil depletion and make the sample like a closed sink for the infused oil.
2.3. Structural and surface characterization
Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, Carl Zeiss Microscopy GmbH, Jena, Germany) working at an accelerating voltage of 10 kV for the BSE imaging mode and 3 kV for the SE imaging mode, was used to examine the coating cross-section, coating surface fracture, and feedstock powders. Coating surface topography was studied by the scanning electron microscope (SEM, JEOL, IT-500, Tokyo, Japan) and with an optical profilometer (Alicona Infinite Focus G5, Alicona Imaging GmbH, Raaba, Austria) equipped with an optical objective with magnification of 5×, for the analyses of surface roughness and the topography. For the SLIPS after cyclic icing testing, it was cleaned with ultrasonic bath of ethanol to remove the surface oil layer and air dried then examined with the optical profilometer. All the samples were coated with a conductive 8 ± 1 nm Pt/Pd layers before SEM investigations. The samples were cut and mounted in cold resin, then grinded and polished with sandpapers and diamond paste up to 1 μm for cross-section examination. Fourier transform infrared spectroscope (FTIR, PerkinElmer FT-IR spectrometer, Waltham, MA, USA) with a Specac attenuated total reflectance (ATR) diamond module was used to confirm the impregnated oil's presence in the coating structure after the cyclic icing/de-icing testing.
A droplet shape analyzer (DSA100, Krüss GmbH, Hamburg, Germany) was used to study the surface wettability by a sessile drop measurement technique and ellipse (tangent) fitting approach. Both static and sliding contact angle measurements were done using ultra-high-purity water (MilliQ, Millipore Corporation, Burlington, MA, USA) at the room temperature of 24 ± 1 °C and a controlled humidity of 54 ± 3 % by placing at least nine droplets of 10 μL on the sample's surface. The samples for the sliding test inclined up to 30° to measure the sliding angle.
2.4. Icing tests
The SLIPS were tested for their icephobicity behaviors at Tampere University's (TAU) Ice Laboratory facilities under a controlled environment of temperature (−10 °C) and relative humidity (80 ± 5 %). Fig. 2. Illustrate the ice accretion process and the CAT test. Four parallel samples from each coating and SLIPS types were tested to evaluate the average ice adhesion value with their standard deviation. Reference samples of Teflon tape (3 M, Minnesota, USA) were used as the process of quality control. Ice was accreted from deionized water droplets which accelerated to supercooled stage using the icing wind tunnel (IWiT), as shown in Fig. 2 a). The wind speed was 25 m/s. Mixed glaze ice was accreted on the sample's surface with the dimensions of 30 mm × 30 mm and the height of ∼10 mm. After ice accretion, the samples were left in the cold room for ∼16 h for integrated ice solidification. Ice adhesion strength was performed using the centrifugal ice adhesion tester (CAT) in the Ice Laboratory with the same controlled cold environment conditions. In CAT, the sample with the already accreted ice is fixed on a longitudinal sample holder and carefully balanced with a counterweight, then fixed inside the CAT. In the test, the sample is rotated with a constant acceleration speed (300 rpm/s) until the ice detaches from the surface, while the connected software records that rotational speed, as shown in Fig. 2 b). The shear ice adhesion strength 
 (kPa) is calculated as the ratio of the ice detachment centrifugal force 
 (N) and the ice area 
 (m2), Eq. 1:
(1)
where 
(kg) is the mass of the accreted ice on the sample, 
 (m) is the radial spinning length, and 
(rad/s) is the rotational speed. More details can be found from the previous work (Khammas and Koivuluoto, 2022).
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (110KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Illustration of a) wind tunnel ice accretion process and b) CAT testing at TAU's Ice Laboratory.

3. Results and discussion
3.1. Structural characterization
The PEEK powder displayed an irregular particle shape allocated randomly, and the particles contained an agglomeration of finer particles as well, as shown in Fig. 3 a). The powder's particle size distribution shown in Fig. 3 b) exhibited the powder's particle size distribution, which was used earlier in our previous work to produce LPCS PEEK without reinforcement addition (Khammas and Koivuluoto, 2022). The Al2O3 powders as reinforcements were different in particle size but similar in shape where they exhibited an irregular angular shape with sharp edges, as shown in Fig. 3 c) and 3 d). This can be attributed to the powder manufacturing method, where it was fused in arc furnace, followed by cooling and crushing.
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (944KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Powder morphologies: a) PEEK, b) particle size distribution of PEEK (Khammas and Koivuluoto, 2022), c) coarse Al2O3 and d) fine Al2O3 powders. FESEM images.

In the LPCS, powder particles impact the substrate at a high velocity, which depends on the chosen spray parameters, besides powder type, shape, and size (Ning et al., 2007). Coating forms upon impact in two stages; the first stage is the interaction between the particles and the substrate promoting an adhesion (Maev and Leshchynsky, 2018; Koivuluoto and Vuoristo, 2009; Koivuluoto et al., 2014). To achieve successful coating, bonding between the substrate and the impacted particles should occur. Grit blasting, adding a coating bond layer, and pre-heating the substrate were strategies used in this research to increase the coating adhesion. In the second stage, the coating is formed and built up by plastic deformation not melting, upon high velocity particles' impact with the already adhered particles (Maev and Leshchynsky, 2018; Koivuluoto and Vuoristo, 2009; Koivuluoto and Vuoristo, 2010). The LPCS composite coating of PEEK+Al2O3 showed that PEEK particles created the main matrix and the Al2O3 particles were embedded into the polymer structure in a similar way for the coarse and the fine Al2O3 particles. Fig. 4. shows as an example the FESEM cross-section images of C-PEEK21 and C-PEEK22 coatings, respectively.
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (292KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Coating structures of a), b), c) C-PEEK21 and d), e), f) C-PEEK22 where a) and d) are cross-sectional structure of coating system, b) and e) main coating structure, and c) and f) interface between coating and bond layer. FESEM images.

Ceramic powders, e.g., Al2O3 are usually used with metallic powder in LPCS. Small amount of the additional material in the feedstock can provide an effective substrate activation by increasing the surface roughness and in-situ breakage of the substrate surface oxide film which then can enhance the deposition efficiency compared to spraying the feedstock powder alone (Assadi et al., 2016; Li et al., 2019). The surface activation mechanism can be explained as the ceramic particles in-situ increasing the surface roughness and cleaning any possible existing oxide films and possible boosting their chemical/ metallurgical activity (Sova et al., 2014; Sova et al., 2011; Grigoriev et al., 2015). Additionally, the existence of the hard phase (Al2O3) can permit the working gas (here as air) to reach elevated temperatures without the risk of nozzle blocking or clogging. The after effect have been to enhance the coating compactness where it upgraded particle deformation and bonding as a result of the thermal softening effect at high temperatures (Koivuluoto and Vuoristo, 2009; Koivuluoto et al., 2014; Koivuluoto and Vuoristo, 2010).
The structure of LPCS PEEK+Al2O3 composite coating showed that the PEEK matrix particles were plastically deformed and flattened with distinguishing particle boundaries as shown in Fig. 4 b) and e). In cold spray process, all the kinetic energy should transfer to strain energy and heat to the substrate and/or coating so the particles can adhere successfully (Van Steenkiste, 2007). The flattening of the particles depends on many factors e.g., materials composition, particles shape, temperature, and velocity (Van Steenkiste, 2007). This kind of microstructural building up process was detected also for the Al-Al2O3 bond layer. The Al2O3 particles preserved their shape and size and did not show any plastic deformation, this is typical for ceramic material which has high hardness and high melting temperature (Poza and Garrido-Maneiro, 2022). In the meanwhile, some of the particles showed cracks and fractures (Fig. 4 b) and e)) due to the high-speed velocity of sprayed particles.
Thickness of Al-Al2O3 bond layer for C-PEEK21 coating was 150 ± 30 μm and the coating thickness of C-PEEK21 was 900 μm ± 150 μm, while the Al-Al2O3 bond layer thickness of C-PEEK22 was 250 ± 30 μm and the coating thickness was 1100 ± 150 μm. It can be noticed that the coating bond layer and the coating layer thickness produced with pre-heating (C-PEEK21) are lower than those values of the coating produced without pre-heating the substrate (C-PEEK22). Preheating the substrate during PEEK+Al2O3 spray coating to the temperature of ∼250 °C didn't damage the material because the spraying process implementation was fast with the aid of the robotic spraying arm and also because of the nonconductive nature of polymeric material that does not allow it to heat up fast. Instead, the presence of the heat worked to soften the material and flatten the particles upon impact and compact the coating which, in turn, decreased the coating thickness compared to the ones without pre-heating.
The coating-bond layer interfaces in Fig. 4 c) and f) showed good coating-substrate adhesion without delamination, defects or cracks at the interface region for both cases, with and without pre-heating of substrate. Successful deposition and bonding between dissimilar materials is possible in cold spraying if at least one component has enough ductility to embed the other (Koivuluoto and Vuoristo, 2009). This can be attributed to the mechanical interlocking bonding mechanism which is a distinguished characteristic of cold spray coating process that gives the coating high adhesion strength. The mechanical interlocking formation occurred due to the high-power impact velocity that induced high plastic deformation upon impact of the PEEK polymer with the already deposited Al-Al2O3 bond layer (Poza and Garrido-Maneiro, 2022; Zou et al., 2022).
The coating parameters were optimized to get a porous coating structure for SLIPS. In addition, porosity inside the coating structures was investigated from the coating fracture surfaces, as shown in Fig. 5. The porous structure can be observed for the C-PEEK21 and C-PEEK22 coatings, where the pores covered the whole structure and varied in size and shape. The porosity in these coatings was a particularly important feature because it will work as a reservoir for the infused oil to the SLIPS.
Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (390KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Images of fracture surfaces: a), b) and c) C-PEEK21 and d), e) and f) C-PEEK22 coatings. FESEM images.

Fig. 6. shows coating surface topographies observed with the optical profilometer and SEM images of coating surfaces. Open porosity was recognized and topographical structures showed relatively uniformly distributed Al2O3 particles in the coating structure (light gray particles). The feedstock powder temperature did not raise too much in the LPCS coating method (Karthikeyan, 2007; Moridi et al., 2014), therefore, the material did not experience phase change or melting. Instead, the accelerated particles deformed and mechanically interlocked upon impact to form the coating layer. Also, both coating surface features (Fig. 6.) as well as fracture surfaces (Fig. 5.) were relatively similar to feedstock powders without any signs of melting. It is also worth mentioning that in the cold spray process the last particles hitting are not compacted as the previous layers because of the lack of compacting effect of next coming particles (Van Steenkiste, 2007).
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (208KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Topographies of a), b) and c) C-PEEK21 and d), e) and f) C-PEEK22 coating surfaces investigated with the optical profilometer and SEM.

3.2. Ice adhesion strength
Ice adhesion strength is an important property that can determine the surface icephobicity (Laroche et al., 2020). Researchers have used different methods to evaluate ice adhesion strength of the surfaces and using different ice types in the evaluations (Laroche et al., 2020; Work and Lian, 2018; Bayer, 2020). In this work, mixed glaze ice was accreted in IWiT to mimic the atmospheric ice accretion. The ice adhesion strength of the SLIPS, as an indication of the surface's icephobicity, was measured with CAT and Fig. 7a) shows the ice adhesion values for S-PEEK11 and S-PEEK12 and compares them to C-PEEK11 and C-PEEK12 porous coatings (without lubrication). The porous coatings here were not meant to serve as an anti-icing surface, but they worked as a coating comparison reference for their corresponding SLIPS. In addition to this, Fig. 7b) shows the ice adhesion results for the S-PEEK11 and S-PEEK12 after cycling icing testing with four icing / de-icing cycles.
Fig. 7
Download: Download high-res image (146KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Ice adhesion strengths values for S-PEEK1,1 S-PEEK12 (SLIPS) and C-PEEK1,1 C-PEEK12 (porous coatings) a) first icing/de-icing cycle and b) cyclic icing test.

The ice adhesion value for S-PEEK11 was 144 kPa, which was relatively high, whereas for S-PEEK1,2 it was 81 kPa. This can be considered as an icephobic surface according to the icephobic materials definition (below 100 kPa) (Golovin et al., 2016). The ice adhesion strength values of SLIPS were considerably lower than their corresponding porous coatings as presented in Fig. 7a), where ice adhesion strength of S-PEEK11 and S-PEEK12 was lower than C-PEEK11 and C-PEEK12 with the reduction of 74 % and 71 %, respectively. This difference in ice adhesion values between coating and SLIPS emphasized the lubricant (Si-oil) existence role in lowering the adhesion between ice and the surface. The durability and icephobic properties of the surfaces were examined with the cyclic icing /de-icing test by repeating the ice accretion and de-icing four times. The cyclic icing performance is presented in Fig. 7b) where it can be noticed that the ice adhesion strength increased after each icing /de-icing cycle. In addition, for the S-PEEK12 (no preheating of substrate before LPCS) after the fourth cycle, the SLIPS showed cohesive failure. This can highlight the effect of preheating the substrate before the LPCS process like with S-PEEK11 on coating quality. Pre-heating proved to enhance the coating adhesion to the substrate where the SLIPS withstand the four icing/de-icing cycles while the S-PEEK12 failed at the fourth icing / de-icing cycle.
According to the ice adhesion results for S-PEEK11 and S-PEEK1,2 further coating structural optimization was done by selecting finer Al2O3 particle size, and surface design configuration by sealing the sample edges to maintain the oil inside the structure and not leaking from the sides, practically when the sample subjected to the centrifugal high speed rotation during CAT. This way we focused on SLIPS performance only from the surface side. Fig. 8a). shows S-PEEK21 and S-PEEK22 ice adhesion strength with its reference porous coatings and Fig. 8b). shows the SLIPS cyclic icing/de-icing ice adhesion strength results, besides ice adhesion values of refilled SLIPS. Refilling of SLIPS was done after cyclic icing testing by impregnating a lubricant into the surface. This lubricant refilling returned the SLIPS performance. Ice adhesion of refilled SLIPS was restored as similar level as original SLIPS, indicating easy restoration when the amount of lubricant is decreasing in the structure.
Fig. 8
Download: Download high-res image (168KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Ice adhesion strength values for S-PEEK2,1 S-PEEK22 (SLIPS) and C-PEEK2,1 C-PEEK22 (porous coatings) a) first icing/de-icing cycle and b) cyclic icing test.

Furthermore, lubricant viscosity is an important factor that can affect the SLIPS' icephobicity and durability. Low Si-oil viscosity is associated with low ice adhesion because the oil spreads and infiltrates in the porous structure easily. Liu et al. (Liu et al., 2020) reported that infusing Si-oil (10 m Pa·s) into porous anodic Al2O3 it reduced the ice adhesion strength by 99 % comparing to the bare Al alloy, but the ice adhesion values tend to increase faster after de-icing cycles. The low viscosity oil migrates to the surface faster by capillary forces and drain rapidly which leads to partial solid surface exposure, which reduces the long-term SLIPS functionality (Tripathi et al., 2023). While for higher Si-oil viscosities (100 and 200 mPa·s), after several de-icing cycles the surfaces showed dramatical ice adhesion decrease (Liu et al., 2020). This can be attributed to higher SLIPS' oil viscosity can have higher internal friction, flow resistance and challenge to spread and infiltrate inside the porous structure (Tripathi et al., 2023). The medium viscosities (20 and 50 mPa·s) raised the ice adhesion slowly after the de-icing test and showed balance between anti-icing performance and SLIPS' durability (Liu et al., 2020).
The ice adhesion values for S-PEEK21 and S-PEEK22 were 45 kPa and 43 kPa respectively, which can be considered as low ice adhesion surfaces (below 50 kPa) (Golovin et al., 2016; Koivuluoto et al., 2020). It can be noticed that the ice adhesion values of S-PEEK21 and S-PEEK22 decreased by 60 % and 46 % compared to S-PEEK11 and S-PEEK1,2 respectively. Furthermore, PEEK coating optimization here by adding fine Al2O3 and sample edges sealing enhanced the ice adhesion values for the coating itself and the SLIPS compared to the surfaces in the 1st development stage in our previous research (Khammas and Koivuluoto, 2022). There, ice adhesion after the first cycle was 348 kPa for CS-PEEK and 71 kPa for its SLIPS (Khammas and Koivuluoto, 2022), while here is the values were 244 kPa for the porous coating and 45 kPa for its SLIPS.
For the cyclic icing/de-icing as shown in Fig. 8b)., ice adhesion values of S-PEEK21 for the fourth cycle were lower than S-PEEK11 by the reduction of 60 %, and by 55 % for the third cycle for S-PEEK22 compared to S-PEEK12 (because S-PEEK12 fourth cycle samples failed cohesively). This highlighted the role of coating structural optimization for decreasing the ice adhesion values of the SLIPS. Additionally, after three months of the cyclic icing/de-icing test, the surfaces were refilled with lubricant and ice adhesion strength was tested to investigate the SLIPS' restoration and multi-usability which, in turn extended their durability. It was found that the SLIPS had the ability to totally recall the similar low ice adhesion results with the same intact surfaces. These results featured the SLIPS' durability and sustainability to be reusable with one easy step of oil refilling without losing surface's function.
By calculating the oil mass for the SLIPS before and after the cyclic icing/de-icing test, as shown in Table 3., it was found that the oil amount decreased by 78 % and 87 % for S-PEEK 21 and S-PEEK2,2 respectively. The surfaces lost most of the oil content during the icing cyclic test (Barthwal et al., 2019; Bottone et al., 2021; Heydarian et al., 2023).This can be attributed to many factors. Firstly, the mechanical effect of the fast supercooled water droplets surface strike (25 m/s) during the wind tunnel ice accretion that can remove the oil surface layer, although it is not lasting a lot due to the fast formation of the initial frost layer on the sample surface but still it can have minor oil removal (Bottone et al., 2021). Secondly, the high-speed of the centrifugal rotational shear stress during the CAT testing until the ice is de-attached from the surface can expel the oil from the structure, as in our previous work (Khammas and Koivuluoto, 2022). Thirdly, the nature of the SLIPS when they interact with coming water droplet to form a wetting ridge and encapsulated with a thin oil film ‘cloaking effect’ due to capillary forces, which can deplete the oil from the structure with repetition (Wang and Wu, 2024; David Smith et al., 2013). Despite that, the SLIPS samples still had lower ice adhesion (118 kPa for S-PEEK21 and 120 kPa and for S-PEEK22) after cyclic icing testing than after one icing cycle for the porous coating (244 kPa for C-PEEK21 and 259 kPa for C-PEEK22). This can indicate that even a small amount of lubricant oil inside the coating structure can work to reduce the ice adhesion strength significantly (Zhu et al., 2013).
Table 3. Weight of infused oil in the SLIPS for 30 mm × 30 mm surface area before and after the icing test.

Sample	Oil infused in the SLIPS (mg)	Oil remaining in the SLIPS after icing (mg)
S-PEEK 21	416.7 ± 69.2	89.8 ± 19.8(−78 %)
S-PEEK22	401.8 ± 77.1	50.6 ± 4.2(−87 %)
FT-IR tests were done for the SLIPS before and after the icing test and compared to the coating and Si-oil itself as shown in Fig. 9. For the lubricant used (Si-oil) FT-IR spectra, the IR absorption can be seen in the regions ∼1260, 1080, and 1000 cm −1, respectively as a result of the Si -CH3, Si- C, and Si- O bonds, where these are the distinguished bands of the silicone oil (Kim et al., 2012). These IR absorption regions can also be noticed for the SLIPS before and after icing test, which indicated the oil existence in the porous structure compared to the coating without any oil. This behaviour was observed in our previous work (Khammas and Koivuluoto, 2022) and in B. Aktas et al. (Aktaş et al., 2025) research where even after cyclic icing/de-icing test Si-oil still exists in the structure and works to decrease the ice adhesion strength significantly comparing to coating without oil.
Fig. 9
Download: Download high-res image (257KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. FT-IR spectra for the a) S-PEEK21 and C-PEEK2,1 and b) S-PEEK22 and C-PEEK22 before and after cyclic icing compared to Si-oil and the coatings.

3.3. Surface wettability
The water contact angle (WCA) is one of the important properties of surfaces that are designed to work as icephobic surfaces where less contact area (high WCA) between the coming droplets with the surface can suggest, but not obligate, that the droplet can easily shed (low CAH) from the surface before freezing starts, as in superhydrophobic materials (Li et al., 2021). This was not the case with C-PEEK21 and C-PEEK22 where although the coating had high WCAs of 131° and 130°, respectively (Fig. 10.), the droplets pinned on the surface and did not move. This was because the water droplet-surface contact model followed the Wenzel wetting regime where the droplet penetrated inside the surface roughness and anchored (Wood and Kietzig, 2020), as illustrated in Fig. 11a), b), c), c´) and d). This was also the reason why the coating alone had high ice adhesion values and cannot be used for icephobic purposes.
Fig. 10
Download: Download high-res image (158KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 10. Wettability and surface roughness values for coatings and the SLIPS before and after cyclic icing.

Fig. 11
Download: Download high-res image (546KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 11. Illustration of a) coating surface, b) droplet deposited on coating surface, c) and c´) are water droplet deposited on C-PEEK21 and C-PEEK22 respectively, d) tilted coating surface with water droplet, e) SLIPS before icing test, f) water droplet deposited on SLIPS before icing test, g) and g´) are water droplet deposited on S-PEEK21 and S-PEEK22 before icing, g´´) SLIPS droplet-surface interaction before icing test, h) tilted SLIPS with water droplet before icing test, i) SLIPS after icing test, j) water droplet deposited on SLIPS after icing test, k) and k´) are S-PEEK21 and S-PEEK22 after icing test, l) tilted SLIPS with water droplet after icing test.

In the case of S-PEEK21 and S-PEEK22 SLIPS before the icing test, the infused oil covered the surface roughness and penetrated through the structure porosity, as shown in Fig. 11 e). WCA values were 90° and 89°, respectively. When adding a water droplet on the SLIPS surface, it followed Cassie-Baxter mode of surface wetting, but instead of the surface porosity trapped air cushion, we had here the infused oil layer. Capillary forces formed annular oil wetting ridges surrounding the droplet and covered the real water contact angle (Hoque et al., 2022), as shown in Fig. 11 f), g), g´) and g´´) which resulted in lower WCA values compared to coatings and SLIPS after icing. The macroscopic oil layer may extend and encapsulate the water droplet and ‘cloak’ it, depending on the spreading parameter 
, where in the case of balance between the interfacial surface energies it can be represented as:
Where 
 are the interfacial surface energy between oil- water, water- air and oil- air respectively. 
 can suggest whether the oil can cloak the water droplet in the presence of air or not. In the case of 
, the lubricant oil will spread over the top of the water droplet and cloak it (Hoque et al., 2022; Anand et al., 2015; Peppou-Chapman et al., 2020), and this was the case with the SLIPS as shown in Fig. 11. Besides other factors, the cloaking can cause surface oil removal during droplet sliding and depletion over time, Fig. 11h).
Even though the SLIPS had a lower WCA than the coating, the lubricant oil here worked as a sliding agent for the droplets and gave low sliding angles (SA) of 8° and 10° for S-PEEK21 and S-PEEK2,2 respectively. Contant angle hysteresis (CAH) is the difference between the advanced and the receding droplet contact angles at the moment of sliding, and it indicates how easily the drop can move away from the surface (Hejazi and Nosonovsky, 2013). The lower CAH, the less the force tangent to the surface that is required to move the droplet and the lower tilting angle needed to slide the droplet (Tripathi et al., 2023). For the SLIPS before cyclic icing, the CAH was 2.3° for S-PEEK21 and 2.6° for S-PEEK2.2 While for the same samples after cyclic icing, the CAH angles were 6.3° for both. The rise in the CAH can be attributed to the decrease in oil surface layer due to mechanical factors and cloaking status (Khammas and Koivuluoto, 2022).
After the cyclic icing/de-icing test, the oil surface layer was decreased as explained before due to the mechanical stresses, but thin layer of oil still covered the porous structure as illustrated in Fig. 11i) and shown also in the oil content calculations (Table 2) supported by the FT-IR graph in Fig. 9. Here, the droplet-surface contact can be recognized easily where there were no surface oil ridges to cover it, as in Fig. 11j), k) and k´). The WCAs were 103° ± 4° and 101° ± 1.6° and the sliding angles were 15° ± 6° and 14° ± 3.8° for S-PEEK21 and S-PEEK22 respectively. The remaining small amount of oil still worked to facilitate the water droplet sliding with CAH angles of 6.3 ± 2.4 and 6.3 ± 1.7 respectively, in contrast to the surfaces without any oil where the droplets were pinned in the Wenzel state.
The surface roughness for the coatings and for the SLIPS after icing have similar values as show in Fig. 10, where it was 21 μm for C-PEEK21 and C-PEEK22 and 22 μm for S-PEEK21 and S-PEEK2.2 That suggests the cyclic icing didn't affect the surface roughness and didn't remove any surface particles, indicating durable structure.
4. Conclusions
In this study, and based on our previous research work results and recommendations (Khammas and Koivuluoto, 2022), SLIPS's for icephobic purposes were fabricated by LPCS coating method using blended composite feedstock material of 90 vol% PEEK +10 vol% Al2O3 with and without preheating the substrate, then infused the resulting porous coating with a lubricant (here Si-oil). The SLIPS further optimized structurally by using finer Al2O3 powder and by sample edge sealing. Surfaces' icephobicity was tested by ice accretion using icing wind tunnel (IWiT) followed by ice adhesion test using CAT. The results exhibited low ice adhesion of 45 kPa for S-PEEK21 and 43 kPa for S-PEEK2,2 which indicates high icephobicity. The surface durability, in conjunction with its icephobicity, was tested by cyclic icing tests, and the maximum ice adhesion results were 118 kPa and 120 kPa for S-PEEK21 and S-PEEK2,2 respectively. After refilling the surface with the lubricant, the ice adhesion strength was recorded as 38 kPa for S-PEEK21 and 35 kPa for S-PEEK2.2 This emphasizes the SLIPS' reusability to return the low ice adhesion performance with one easy step, besides preserving its mechanical durability. Future work can explore other SLIPS material combinations for serving as icephobic surfaces produced with thermal and cold spraying such as metallic and ceramic structures together with different types of lubricants.