1. Introduction
Wind energy is one of the most established renewable energy sources, which has paid more attention in recent years [[1], [2], [3]]. The power generation is a common method of wind energy utilization worldwide. Wind turbines generally tend to be installed in areas with high terrain and cold climate, where wind energy is abundant, thereby facilitating the power generation efficiency [[4], [5], [6]]. However, icing phenomenon on wind turbine blades occurs, leading to stalling, power loss and safety hazards [7,8]. Therefore, it is of great significance to explore the ice distribution characteristics on the surface of the blade airfoil under icing conditions for the development of wind turbine anti-icing technology.
For a long time, many researchers have been studying the icing issues of wind turbines. The icing characteristics of wind turbine blades is studied by numerical simulation and icing wind tunnel test methods [[9], [10], [11]].
Numerical simulation method has played an important role in the study of icing characteristics of wind turbines, which describes the ice shapes, ice distribution and aerodynamic performance of the airfoil [[12], [13], [14]]. In fact, the icing process of wind turbines is a complex phenomenon. To simplify the calculation process, researchers can simplify models in the numerical calculation. However, it will lead to the deviation between the simulation results and the actual icing process.
The icing wind tunnel test is an experimental method that describes the icing process under natural icing conditions, which has obvious advantages in obtaining results close to actual icing state [15,16]. For example, Jiang et al. [17] analyzed the influence of tip ratio on the icing characteristics of the S809 asymmetric airfoil by the icing wind tunnel experiment. Their results showed that when the tip ratio was <1, the surface of the airfoil was completely covered by ice accretion. Shu et al. [18] studied on the effect of icing on the power loss of wind turbines, and reported that the power loss rate was as high as 22 %/min in the initial stage of icing process. Liang et al. [19] conducted the icing wind tunnel experiment on the DU25 airfoil of offshore wind turbines, and reported that the icing characteristics of different chord lengths had similarities. Jin and Virk [20] investigated the effect of ice accretion on the aerodynamic performance of wind turbines with S826 and S832 airfoils under icing conditions, and reported that the performance degradation of the wind turbine with S832 airfoil was more pronounced under wet rime ice conditions. Shen et al. [21] investigated the icing characteristics on the NACA0018 airfoil of a vertical-axis wind turbine by icing wind tunnel experiment, and reported that the ice layer grew most rapidly in the range of 0–10 % of the blade chord length. Hu et al. [22] found that the tip portion of the S809 airfoil had a higher icing rate than that of the root portion during icing process. Jin and Virk [23] reported that the aerodynamic performance of the DU96 airfoil wind turbine degraded with an increase of angle of attack under glaze ice condition.
Most researchers mainly focus on the ice shapes on asymmetric airfoil surfaces. However, the mechanism of icing characteristics is still unclear under icing conditions. As a NACA63–412 airfoil used for the blade tip design of a horizontal axis wind turbine, there is a lack of literature regarding the ice distribution on the upper and lower surfaces under icing conditions. Understanding the ice distribution on a NACA63–412 airfoil can describe the mechanism of effect of different environmental parameters on icing characteristics in detail, which will comprehensive reference data for optimizing the anti/de-icing method design of wind turbines. Furthermore, the significance of the effect of environmental parameters on the icing characteristics of a NACA63–412 airfoil has not been reported.
Therefore, the main objectives of this study are as follows: (1) to explore the ice distribution on the upper and lower surfaces of a NACA63–412 airfoil; (2) to analyze the significance of the effect of environmental parameters on the icing characteristics.
2. Experimental methods
2.1. Experimental system
The experiment was carried out in the reflux icing wind tunnel built by Northeast Agricultural University [24]. It consisted of a spray system, a cooling system, a stable system, and a test cross-section of 250 mm × 250 mm, as shown in Fig. 1(a). The layout of the test points in the test section was shown in Fig. 1(b). The test model was installed in the central zone of the test section. Wind speed at different positions was measured by a hot wire anemometer (testo405i). As shown in Fig. 1(c), it is obvious that the wind speed distribution was relatively uniform in the central zone of the experimental section. Due to the fact that the test model was installed in the central zone, the fluctuation of wind speed near the wall was ignored. As shown in Fig. 1(d), the temperature distribution was relatively uniform in the central zone of the experimental section. To sum up, the test accuracy was ensured by calibrating the temperature and wind speed in the wind tunnel experimental system.
Fig 1
Download: Download high-res image (614KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Icing wind tunnel system.

The lift-drag ratio of the NACA63–412 airfoil was high, increasing the power generation efficiency of wind turbines. In addition, owing to its ability to maintain high lift at high angles of attack without easily stalling, it was suitable for improving the power generation efficiency of wind turbines in complex wind conditions while avoiding blade damage caused by stalling. Thus, the NACA63–412 airfoil was used in the blade tip design of a horizontal axis wind turbine due to its excellent aerodynamic performance [25]. As shown in Fig. 2, the NACA63–412 airfoil was an asymmetric airfoil with a maximum relative thickness of 12 %. The maximum camber position was 40 % of the leading edge. The span and chord length of NACA63–412 airfoil were 20 mm and 100 mm, respectively. The NACA63–412 airfoil was made of fiberglass.
Fig 2
Download: Download high-res image (50KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. The NACA63–412 airfoil.

2.2. Experimental parameters
Battisti [26] mentioned environmental parameters for wind turbine operation, including the ambient temperature of 233–323 K, wind speed of 3–25 m/s and the medium volume parameter (MVD) of 10–5000 μm. Ambient temperatures of −5 °C and −15 °C represented two typical icing conditions of glaze ice and rime ice, respectively. Wind speeds of 5 m/s and 15 m/s affected the start-up and aerodynamic performance of wind turbines, respectively. Water droplets with the size of 50 μm were more common in cold climate regions. Therefore, icing conditions were adopted in this study as follows: ambient temperature of −5 °C and −15 °C, wind speed of 5 m/s and 15 m/s, MVD of 50 μm. The significance of selecting a 0° angle of attack in icing conditions was to evaluate the icing characteristics of the blade airfoil without deflection, which would better understand the impact of icing on the aerodynamic performance of wind turbines, thereby optimizing the design of anti/de-icing system for wind turbines. Thus, the angle of attack was 0°. The icing time was 3 min. The experimental conditions were shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Experimental conditions.

Case	Wind speed (m/s)	Ambient temperature
(°C)	Droplet diameter
(μm)	Angle of attack
(°)	Icing time
(min)
1	5	−5	50	0	3
2	15	−5	50	0	3
3	5	−15	50	0	3
4	15	−15	50	0	3
2.3. Experimental procedure
Before the experiment, a blower was used to dry the NACA63–412 airfoil cleaned by alcohol. The NACA63–412 airfoil was installed in the central zone of the test section. First, the cooling system was started, and the surface temperature of the airfoil reduced to the temperature required for the experiment. Then the spray system was turned on, which ejected water droplets at a flow rate of 50 ml/min. The water droplets impacted on the surface of the airfoil and began to freeze into ice. When the icing time reached the set value (3 min), the spray system was turned off. The wind speed, ambient temperature and water droplet flow rate were adjusted by a control panel during the experimental process. The icing process on the surface of the airfoil was recorded by a high-speed camera (DSCsingle bondHX200, Sony). Image processing software (CAXA) was used to map the ice shape, thereby determining the icing thickness, icing area, and icing mass.
2.4. Characteristic parameter
For further quantitative analysis of the ice distribution on the surface of the airfoil, the ice thickness(
)was measured. The upper surface of the iced airfoil was located in the rectangular coordinate system, and the stagnation point was located at the coordinate origin. Along the abscissa axis, the chord length of the airfoil was evenly divided into 100 equal parts, with each millimeter corresponding to a unit length. Next, an 
 parameter was proposed to determine the icing location on the airfoil. As shown in Fig. 3(a), the ice thickness was measured along the normal lines of each Xi considering airfoil surface curvature, which could accurately describe the ice thickness at all points on the surface of the airfoil. However, as shown in Fig. 3(b), measuring the ice thickness along the Y axis at each Xi could not accurately describe the ice thickness at all points on the surface of the airfoil. Especially the measured value at the stagnation point was the ice width of windward section rather than the ice thickness. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 3(b), if the ice thickness was measured along the Y axis at each Xi, the ice thickness in the front area (orange area) of the stagnation point could not be described. Therefore, the method of measuring the ice thickness along the normal lines of each Xi was employed in the experiment.
Fig 3
Download: Download high-res image (170KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Measurement of ice thickness.

3. Results and discussion
3.1. Ice distribution
Fig. 4, Fig. 5 show the ice distribution on the upper and lower surfaces of the airfoil under different wind speeds at ambient temperature of −5 °C. As shown in Fig. 4, it is obvious that the ice distribution (Y/C) on the surface of the airfoil is asymmetric. However, the ice distribution on the surface of NACA0012 airfoil is basically symmetric [27]. This is due to the unique design of the NACA63–412 airfoil with a curved upper surface and a flat lower surface.
Fig 4
Download: Download high-res image (201KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Ice distribution in the Y-axis direction at various wind speeds.

Fig 5
Download: Download high-res image (261KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Ice distribution in the X-axis direction at various wind speeds.

As shown in Fig. 5, when the wind speed increases from 5 m/s to 15 m/s, the maximum icing range (X/C) on the upper and lower surfaces of the airfoil increases by 13.04 % and 11.76 %, respectively. Owing to the increase of the wind speed, the inertial force enhancement results in a wider distribution of water droplets on the upper and lower surfaces.
Fig. 6, Fig. 7 show the effect of ambient temperature on the ice thickness distribution of a NACA63–412 airfoil at wind speed of 15 m/s. The ice thickness distribution (Y/C) on the upper and lower surfaces of the airfoil is asymmetrical, as shown in Fig. 6. The maximum ice thickness at ambient temperature of −15 °C is thicker than that at ambient temperature of −5 °C. As shown in Fig. 7, as ambient temperature decreases from −5 °C to −15 °C, the maximum icing range (X/C) on the upper and lower surfaces of the airfoil increases by 7.69 % and 23.81 %, respectively. With decreasing the ambient temperature, it is clear that the water droplet freezing rate shows increasing trend.
Fig 6
Download: Download high-res image (269KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Ice thickness in the Y-axis direction at different ambient temperatures.

Fig 7
Download: Download high-res image (287KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Ice distribution in the X-axis direction at different ambient temperatures.

3.2. Icing area
Fig. 8 shows the variation of icing area on the upper and lower surfaces of the NACA63–412 airfoil. For the ambient temperature of −5 °C, as the wind speed increases from 5 m/s to 15 m/s, the icing area on the upper and lower surfaces of the airfoil rises in the range of 27.17–40.58 mm2 (49.35 % increase) and 22.72–35.26 mm2 (55.19 % increase), respectively. For the wind speed of 5 m/s, as ambient temperature drops from −5 °C to −15 °C, the icing area on the upper and lower surfaces of the airfoil increases in the range of 27.17–47.24 mm2 (73.87 % increase) and 22.72–41.96 mm2 (84.68 % increase), respectively. This is attributed to the fact that the droplet collection efficiency and droplet freezing rate enhancement can cause larger icing area with increasing wind speed and decreasing ambient temperature.
Fig 8
Download: Download high-res image (239KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Icing area on different surfaces of NACA63–412 airfoil.

The effect of wind speed and ambient temperature on the icing area of the NACA63–412 airfoil is studied, as shown in Fig. 9. At ambient temperature of −5 oC, as the wind speed rises from 5 m/s to 15 m/s, the icing area of the airfoil increases from 49.89 mm² to 75.84 mm² (52.01 % increase). At wind speed of 5 m/s, as ambient temperature drops from −5 °C to −15 °C, the icing area of the NACA63–412 airfoil increases from 49.89 mm2 to 89.2 mm2 (78.79 % increase). This is because an increase in wind speed leads to an increase in droplet inertia force, while the decrease in ambient temperature leads to an increase in droplet freezing rate. In addition, the influence of ambient temperature on the icing area is more significant than that of wind speed. This indicates that the variation in droplet freezing rate is greater than droplet collection efficiency during icing process.
Fig 9
Download: Download high-res image (218KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Effect of wind speed and ambient temperature on icing area.

3.3. Icing mass
The icing mass of the airfoil surface is affected by wind speed and ambient temperature, as shown in Fig. 10. At the ambient temperature of −5 °C, as the wind speed increases from 5 m/s to 15 m/s, the icing mass on the airfoil surface rises from 1.0 g to 1.52 g. At the wind speed of 5 m/s, as the ambient temperature reduces from −5 °C to −15 °C, the icing mass on the airfoil increases from 1.0 g to 1.78 g. This is because an increase in wind speed leads to an increase in droplet collection efficiency, while the decrease in ambient temperature results in an increase in droplet freezing rate. Moreover, the influence of ambient temperature on the icing mass is more significant than that of wind speed. The variation in ambient temperature will significantly affect the droplet freezing rate, while droplet collection efficiency changes slowly due to the variation in cohesive strength. This explains the discrepancy in the impact of ambient temperature and wind speed on the icing mass.
Fig 10
Download: Download high-res image (205KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 10. Effect of wind speed and ambient temperature on icing mass.

4. Conclusion
In this paper, the effect of wind speed and ambient temperature on the icing characteristics of the NACA63–412 airfoil has been investigated by the icing wind tunnel experiment. The following conclusions are deduced:
1)
For ambient temperature of −5 °C, as wind speed increases from 5 m/s to 15 m/s, the icing area on the upper and lower surfaces of the airfoil increases by 49.35 % and 55.19 %, respectively.
2)
For wind speed of 15 m/s, as ambient temperature decreases from −5 °C to −15 °C, the icing area on the upper and lower surfaces of the airfoil increases by 73.87 % and 84.68 %, respectively.
3)
The influence of ambient temperature on the icing mass is more significant than that of wind speed.