Abstract
All electric vehicles should have effective battery heat management since high temperatures give an adverse influence on battery performance, dependability, and lifespan. In order to examine how air cooling method affect battery pack thermal behavior, this study examines the thermal management of cylindrical lithium-ion battery packs using air cooling techniques, which are critical for performance and safety in electric and hybrid vehicles. Experimental investigations were conducted to evaluate cooling effectiveness under various operating conditions. The battery module is housed in a specially made acrylic shell and is made up of cylindrical 18650 lithium-ion cells organized in a 7 × 2 aligned matrices (14 cells altogether). This model of battery was replaced by heater cartridges with a 150 W capacity and the same geometry. A wide range of operating conditions were studied in terms of inlet air temperatures, Reynolds number (Re), heat fluxes, and heat generation. The results exhibit that the good cooling performance can be attained with an inlet air temperature of 20 °C and Reynolds number (Re) of 4700. The cooling performance factor decreased obviously with the rise of energy consumption. The maximum performance factor of 170 with Re number of 988. Moreover, the best performance of cylindrical cell battery module in terms of thermal–hydraulic enhancement factor (THEF) was achieved at low inlet air temperature and Re numbers values of 3700 and 4700. The findings show that forced air cooling continues to be a successful thermal management technique under a variety of operating circumstances, guaranteeing steady and secure battery performance.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Forced air coolingHeat transferBattery thermal managementThermo-hydraulic performance parametersPerformance factor
Nomenclature

A	Heat transfer area, [m2]	Vmax	Maximum velocity, [m/s]
Cp	Specific heat, [kJ/kg.K]	Χ	Correction factor, [−]
D	Cylindrical cell diameter, [m]	THEF	Thermal–Hydraulic Enhancement Factor, [−]
Eu	Euler number, [−]
f	Friction factor, [−]	Greek Symbol	
hav	Average heat transfer coefficient, [W/m2.K]	Δ	Difference, [−]
kf	Thermal conductivity, [W/m. K]	ϕ	Performance factor [−]
L	Length, [m]	ρ	Air density, [kg/m3]
Mass flow rate, [ kg/s]	μ	Kinematic viscosity, [Pa s]
N	Number of cylindrical cells, [−]	Subscript	
Nu	Average Nusselt number, [−]	av	Average
P	Pressure, [Pa]	c	Cross-section
Pf	Energy consumption, [W]	d	Dissipation
Pr	Prandtl number, [−]	g	Generation
Qg	Heat generation, [W]	m	Mean
qflux	Heat flux rate, [W]	min	Minimum
Re	Reynolds number [−]	ref	Reference/base
T	Temperature, [oC]	s	Surface
V	Electrical voltage, [volt]	w	Wall
Vav	Average velocity, [m/s]		
1. Introduction
Air cooling significantly enhances the thermal reliability of cylindrical lithium-ion battery packs in the hybrid and electrical vehicles through improved effective temperature management and heat dissipation. Numerous researches showed that effective air-cooling techniques be capable to reduce the uppermost temperatures and temperature differences between cells, hence augmenting battery lifespan and safety. Various parameters like air flow rate and inlet air temperature have to study in efficient battery thermal management systems (BTMS). When compared to alternative (parameters) arrangements, compacted inlet air cooling was shown to reduce the highest temperature increase [1]. During operation, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) produce a lot of heat, particularly in high-power usages such as electric cars. Maintaining optimum working temperatures within range from −50 to 60 °C, avoiding thermal fugitive, ensuring stable temperature distribution, and extending battery lifespan all depend on effective thermal management [2]. Despite being simple and cost-effective, air cooling may not be as effective for bigger battery packs as liquid cooling systems, which provide better thermal management but are more complicated and expensive [3,4]. Because of their high energy density, lightweight design, and superior recharge ability, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are now widely used in electric vehicles and other modern gadgets [5].
A normal and adjustable type of rechargeable power supply, the cylindrical cells of lithium-ion batteries have a typical tube-shaped. These batteries are mostly utilized in numerous applications, such as electrical vehicles, moveable electronic, and other devices. A rolled assembly named a jelly roll, which comprises of a cathode, an anode, a separator, and two current collectors for an element layer, makes up cylindrical lithium-ion battery cells. Industry standards for normal volumes, including 18650 [6] and 21700 [7], are a mirror image of the acceptance and reliability of the cylindrical lithium-ion battery technology.
Due to its many benefits, including its straightforward structural design, low cost, lightweight nature, ease of maintenance, long lifespan, ease of replacing a single cell, and low power consumption at a low battery discharge rate, air cooling is one of the most widely used methods to dissipate heat in battery thermal storage systems. In air-cooling methods, the battery's effective surface area exposed to ambient air is increased by the addition of cooling fins or other heat-dissipating components. The heat is removed from the battery as air passes over these structures, avoiding overheating. To actively improve air circulation and cooling efficiency, further parts, such fans, may be added. Therefore, Numerous of studies attempted to examine the air cooling systems for varying numbers of LiBs from single cells to packs where one of the problems with air-cooling systems has been the structure for improved air dispersion. There are many different kinds of LiBs cells available on the market for a variety of uses, such as cylindrical [8], prismatic [9], and pouch [10] designs. The thermal properties of an air-cooled battery thermal management system designed especially for a cylindrical ion battery module with a honeycomb structure were investigated by Yang et al. [8]. They developed ion battery module featuring a honeycomb structure. They shaped an air distribution plate to increase the battery module's temperature consistency. The effects of orifice diameter, orifice rows, and intake pressure were investigated by Zhou et al. [11]. Their findings showed that lowering the maximum temperature and improving temperature uniformity can be achieved by increasing the orifice's width and number of rows. It can also be valuable to modify the configuration of the battery module. Wang et al. [12] considered a thermal efficiency of the battery module's utilizing a diversity of cell arrangement configurations, comprising rectangular, hexagonal, and circular designs. Kummitha [13] offered a scheme to reduce the upper limit of the temperature that the battery cells may be touched while attaining a steady temperature dispersal within a battery unit. The basis and innovative battery units were evaluated under different discharge setups while keeping the same physical specifications and boundary conditions. The thermoelectric (TEC) air-cooling unit can be utilized to cool a lithium-ion battery pack type 18650. It was shown that TEC module had been decreased battery temperature to below 40 °C, as reported by Sirikasemsuk et al. [14]. Yang et al. [15] proposed an innovative radiator with a bionics-inspired surface structure. Cells, walls, fans, radiators, and insulated frames make up the battery module. Their findings showed that the highest temperature values and temperature variations between the cells are considerably decreased by the proposed radiator thickness and bionic surface structure height.
The air-cooling system's performance is significantly influenced by the air mass flow rate and channel design [16]. For a staggered battery pack, Lu et al. [17] developed an analytical thermal resistance model and a three-dimensional numerical model. They found that the ideal cooling channel size for the 18650 lithium-ion battery was found to be 1 mm after taking into account variables including peak temperature, space usage, and energy efficiency. In order to improve uniformity, Ji et al. [18] developed a lithium-ion cylindrical battery module with unique cell distribution techniques. It was shown that layouts with greater beginning spacing and arithmetic ratios had slower position-changing times. Heat transfer and dissipation are enhanced when components such as thermal interface materials are made of materials with high thermal conductivity. A battery thermal system with a commercially accessible thermal interface material was presented by Kausthubharam et al. [19], who also compared it to a traditional battery pack at different discharge rates. When compared to the normal configuration, their method shows a notable 25 % drop in the highest temperature. Thermal interface materials were incorporated into 21700 lithium-ion battery modules by Lee et al. [20]. However, their investigation showed that the temperature uniformity throughout the battery module is greatly influenced by the thermal interface materials parallel thermal conductivity. In contrast, maximum battery temperature was more strongly correlated with vertical thermal conductivity. Reciprocal flow has emerged as a new approach to improve cooling system performance, especially in minimizing cell-to-cell differences under different thermal boundary conditions. In both immediate and time-averaged scenarios, a shorter reciprocating duration was associated with lower cell temperature differences and lower maximum cell temperatures, as reported in Ref. [21].
Engineers and researchers are working to enhance the airflow mechanism, cooling appliances, and overall thermal design of air-cooled lithium-ion battery systems utilizing high-level engineering and design methods. This covers the better heat exchanger designs, the development of intelligent thermal control systems, and the search of new cooling materials. The aim is to minimize thermal gradients and prevent localized overheating by attaining a reliable temperature distribution through the battery pack, as stated by Refs. [[22], [23], [24], [25]]. Table 1 reviews the available literature on battery thermal management systems (BTMS). In conclusion, despite being widely used, air-cooled lithium-ion battery systems have a number of limitations. An important obstacle is their limited cooling ability, particularly in high-power uses where heat dissipation becomes crucial. Extreme environments can decrease the effectiveness of these devices since they can be subject to outside temperatures. The battery pack's uneven temperature distribution due to the reliance on air cooling may cause hotspots that impair performance as a whole. Current attempt to enhance the performance of LIB type 18650 based on air-cooling system can be divided into two categories: (1) assess the airflow in terms of inlet mass flow rate and velocity and (2) examine battery operating conditions, including varying battery loadings and ambient air temperatures. In this study, heater cartridges with a 150 W capacity and the same diameter and length (i.e., D = 18 mm and L = 65 mm) were used in place of the lithium-ion battery model of 18650 in order to accurately imitate the internal heat generation rate of the battery. In reality, this technique makes use of a cylindrical heater with same geometrical characteristics, enabling a precise simulation of heat generation. Wide ranges of air velocities, ambient air temperatures, and battery loadings (i.e., heat generation) are experimentally investigated.
Table 1. An overview of the studies on air-cooling BTMS.

Authors	Methodology	Main contribution and Objective	Arrangement	Type of LIBs	Temperature (°C)	Flow velocity (m/s)	Temperature difference (°C)
Zhou et al. [26]	Experimental and Numerical	Honeycomb cooling structure, optimization, and structure parameter	Not mentioned	18650	37.191	0.1–1 m/s	1.978
Hasan et al. [27]	Numerical	Turbulence intensity	Staggered	18650	51	Re = 1.5–3 × 104	3.5
Zhao et al. [28]	Numerical	Temperatures of surroundings and gap spacing	Aligned	18650,
26650,
42110	34	0.1–10 m/s	4
Li et al. [29]	Experimental and Numerical	Not mentioned	Aligned	Not Mentioned	37	0.02–20	3.5
Hai et al. [30]	Numerical	Jacket fins of cell holders	Aligned	Not Mentioned	28	Re = 400	(0.93C discharge)
Li et al. [31]	Experimental and Numerical	Optimization	Not mentioned	21700	29	Not mentioned	Not mentioned
Saechan et al. [32]	Numerical	Structure parameters	Aligned	18650	42	1 m/s	5.2
Xun et al. [33]	Numerical	Channel size and number of cooling channels	Aligned	18650	46	Not mentioned	5
Zhao et al. [34]	Numerical	Operational and structural parameters of multiple short channels	Staggered	18650	37	0.1	(0.7C discharge)
Yang et al. [35]	Experimental and Numerical	Structure parameters	Aligned	18650	32	0.87–1.03 m/s	2.1
Cen et al. [36]	Experimental and Numerical	Automatic control of the pack temperature	Staggered	18650	32	Not mentioned	4
Chen et al. [37]	Numerical	A splitter damper is used in the air inlet and outlet	Aligned	18650	36.2	Not mentioned	Not mentioned
Hai et al. [38]	Numerical	Structure parameters	Aligned	18650	34.8	0.08–0.15 m/s	Not mentioned
Shahid et al. [39]	Experimental and Numerical	Structure parameters	Aligned	18650	28	2.2 m/s	4 %–9 %
Peng et al. [40]	Experimental and Numerical	Optimal configuration	Aligned	18650	28.8	1 m/s	0.75C
Yu et al. [41]	Experimental and Numerical	Transient thermal characteristics	Staggered	18650	36.1	0.8 m/s	2.8
Wang et al. [42]	Experimental and Numerical	Assess an suitable temperature range	Aligned	Not mentioned	55	8 m/s	5
Hasan et al. [43]	Numerical	Optimization	Aligned	Not mentioned	30	Re = 
15,000–30,000	4.8
Wiriyasart et al. [44]	Experimental	Effects of packaging design	Aligned	18650	42	Not mentioned	4–6
Sofi and Qayoum [45]	Numerical	Inlet air flow distribution using pulsing flow	Aligned	18650	49	0.837	5–6
Shaik et al. [46]	Numerical	Optimizing cooling efficiency	Aligned	Not mentioned	56	4–8	7
Hasan et al. [47]	Numerical	Design of an efficient Air-cooling system	Staggered	Not mentioned	87	Re = 15,000 to 30,000	7–8
Alshehri et al. [48]	Numerical	Optimizing geometry parameters	Staggered	Not mentioned	67	2–30	40 (Surface temp. - cooling fluid temp.)
Present work	Experimental	Assessment of thermo-hydraulic performance under various airflow conditions	Aligned	18650	20, 25, 30, 35, 40 (Inlet air temperature)	Re = 988, 2170, 3700, and 4700	Various temperature difference (Surface temp. - cooling fluid temp.)
2. Methodology
2.1. System Description
The setup comprises of a wind tunnel with a battery pack positioned in the test area, as shown in schematic diagram of in Fig. 1 to evaluate the performance of air-cooling for cylindrical lithium-ion battery packs. A centrifugal fan is used to supply the air in the wind tunnel. The air duct with size of 14 cm × 8 cm is used with a centrifugal air blower fixed at the end, as shown in Fig. 1. Cylindrical LIB set up is in an aligned pattern under various airflow conditions for an assessment of thermo-hydraulic performance. Fig. 2 provides in-depth views of the flow arrangement and battery configuration, respectively. The battery module is made up of 14 cylindrical 18650 lithium-ion cells placed in a 7 × 2 matrix, all housed in a specially made acrylic shell. The airflow distribution, inter-cell conduction, and geometric spacing commonly observed in the EV modules with 12–24 cells per submodule are all virtual in this arrangement. By maintaining key dimensionless parameters, such as the Reynolds number, Nusselt number, and spacing ratio (S/D), the array preserves dynamic and thermal similarity, ensuring scalable cooling behavior and temperature gradients. In order to realistically simulate the internal heat generation rate of the battery, the LIBs model of 18650 was replaced in this study by heater cartridges with a maximum capacity of 150 W and the same geometry (i.e., D = 18 mm and L = 65 mm).
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (531KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the developed test facilities.

Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (490KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Arranged of cylindrical cells of lithium-ion battery pack, (a) Two-dimensional view, (b) Global view.

The generated heat flux is uniformly distributed within the model, unlike the actual lithium battery where slight temperature differences occur in various regions and parts inside the battery. These differences arise due to the varying thermal properties of the battery components, such as thermal conductivity and specific heat. The maximum temperature differences at the actual 18650 batteries cell surface reaching of approximately 5–8 °C [49]. This method actually uses a cylindrical heater with the same geometrical properties, which allows for an accurate heat generation simulation. This arrangement thus makes it easier to examine the impact of airflow through the cylindrical heater rods and offers solid insights into the thermal behavior under the operating conditions investigated in this study. The key components of the proposed experimental test rig are: airflow production i.e., centrifugal air blower, flow conditioning section, battery pack section, power control unit, pre-heater unit, and instrumentation & data acquisition.
2.2. Experimental setup
The purpose of the experimental setting was to examine how successfully cylindrical lithium-ion battery packs performed thermo-hydraulically when air-cooled. As shown in in Fig. 1, the setup consisted of a number of essential parts and included instruments for tracking hydraulic and thermal parameters. This experimental setting offers a thorough framework for evaluating the effects of air-cooling arrangements on the thermo-hydraulic performance of cylindrical lithium-ion battery packs. Systematic comparisons between various airflow strategies are made possible by the modular wind tunnel (i.e., air duct), which eventually helps electrified vehicles control their heat more efficiently. Cells of the battery module is a modularly constructed cylindrical lithium-ion battery pack that simulates the conditions of an actual electric vehicle. The battery pack module is made up of fourteen 18650 Li-ion cells organized in seven parallel and two series (7P2S). As seen in Fig. 2, the centers of every cell in a single row or column lined up with one another, i.e., aligned arrangement. Fits cylindrical cells of lithium-ion cells cylindrical batteries of a comparable size are usually arranged and protected using a multi-cylindrical battery holder. The plastic materials used to manufacture the battery holder are referred to as PC + PP + GP. These materials include glass-filled plastic, polycarbonate, and polypropylene, respectively. Moreover, Table 2 provides the battery module's design parameters and specification.
Table 2. Battery module design parameters used in the experiments.

Design parameters	Values
Number of cylindrical cell, N (−)	14 (2x7)
Length of cylindrical cell, L (mm)	65
Diameter of cylindrical cell, d (mm)	18
Longitudinal pitch, SL (mm)	20
Transverse pitch, ST (mm)	20
Transverse spacing ratio, 
 (−)	1.111
Longitudinal spacing ratio, 
 (−)	1.111
The installation strategy for thermocouples to measure localized temperatures across the battery module is shown in Fig. 3. In the cells distribution, a total of seven thermocouples type K are used to measure the battery surface temperatures throughout the battery pack's span in addition to three thermocouples to measure the inlet and outlet temperature of the air and the ambient temperatures. The temperature change across rows and columns is evaluated using seven thermocouples. In order to accomplish the variety distribution outside cell surface temperature, seven sensors are placed on the surface cells using a front and side arrangement for the first and second rows. These sensors are distributed from the center towards the cell borders near the walls. This distribution was designed to be symmetrical along half the width of the airflow channel, providing a detailed representation of the surface conditions on the cell exteriors. Ten channels temperature indicators are used to measure the temperature of the cell surfaces and coolant temperatures. Thermocouples attached to different locations on the battery cells are linked to the data acquisition. With this setup, various temperature locations can be observed instantaneously, providing a clear view of the battery pack's temperature distribution.
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (287KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Top view of Lithium ion battery with thermocouples.

By controlling the fan speed, the speed controller makes it feasible to adjust the airflow rate and conduct experiments under different operating conditions. A hot wire anemometer is utilized to measure air velocity. Differential pressure transducers (Freescale Semiconductor) is employed to measure the pressure drop. A number of AC loads that can be coupled to the battery for investigating at different rates are comprised in the arrangement. These loads allow for the assessment of cooling performance through a wide diversity of discharge rates by simulating the battery's power requires under various usage circumstances. Lastly, the setup comprises an AC power supply unit to run the temperature displays, fan, and preheater unit. It guarantees a steady power source for the whole experimental setup.
The honeycomb mesh was placed in the air duct inlet area to ensure a uniform airflow. Moreover, the uniformity of the airflow cross-section of the air duct was experimentally tested by measuring air velocities at different locations (six points) before entering the unit package with an accuracy of ± (0.1–0.25 m/s) for four different velocities. Table 3 displays a concise of the devices and tools utilized in the experimental setup along with their functions. The uncertainties related to the measured parameters, which comprise temperature, air velocity, pressure difference, current, and voltage are listed in Table 4. To assurance thorough data collection, the selected devices cover velocity, pressure, temperature, and electrical characteristics. To guarantee accurate data collection, all instruments were either calibrated internally or utilized in accordance with accuracy criteria supplied by the manufacturer.
Table 3. Functions of devices and instruments.

#	Device/instruments	Function
1	Battery pack	Subject under test (heated by power cycling)
2	Centrifugal fan	Deliver uniform and controlled airflow into the test section.
3	Hot wire anemometer	Measure airflow velocity
4	Differential pressure transducers	Measuring the pressure difference/drop
5	Temperature Sensors/Thermocouples	Fixed at strategic locations to measure cell surface, inlet, and outlet temperatures
6	Preheater	Preheat is used to heat the air at the duct entrance.
7	Voltmeter and ammeter	Control voltage/current of battery pack
8	Varic	Provide a load bank or variable resistor to simulate drive cycles.
9	Data acquisition system	Logs all airflow velocity, temperature, voltage, and current data
10	Computer	LabVIEW and other hosted control software are used for data gathering, storage, and initial analysis.
Table 4. Experimental devices/instruments with their models and accuracy specifications.

#	Devices/Instruments and models	Model no.	Accuracy	Source
1	Hotwire anemometer	YK-2005AH	±0.05 m/s	Manufacturer
2	Differential pressure transducers-Freescale Semiconductor	MPX2050DP	±1.12 kPa	Calibration
3	Type K thermocouple	TP01	± (0.3–0.8) °C	Calibration
4	Mini Clamp Meter	UNI-T -UT210E	±0.00825 A	Manufacturer
5	AC Voltage Multi-meter	ASWAR DT9208A	±0.5 V	Manufacturer
The main boundary conditions used in the experimental setup are listed in Table 5. In order to describe and regulate the thermal-fluid behavior during testing, these parameters are essential. A detailed evaluation of thermal-fluid dynamics in different heating loads, ambient temperatures, and flow ranges is made potential by this matrix of experimental conditions. Fluid flow and heat transfer behaviors and performance mapping are all valuable assisted by such a shape. Investigation of the effects of flow areas on hydro-thermal performance is made probable by variants in renumbering. The temperature variety covers both typical ambient and high temperatures, which have an effect on heat transfer performance. The considered Reynolds numbers, variety from 988 to 4700, describe the applied airflow in the working cooling duct of an electric vehicle battery. A low value of the Re number (i.e., Re = 988) recognizes light load cooling, while the higher value (i.e., Re = 4700) specifies highest demand in high ambient temperatures or fast-charging circumstances. This range characterizes the variable heat transfer behavior through the coverage of laminar, transitional, and turbulent flow regimes. Similar Re values (800–6000) are established by published studies on EV and electronic cooling systems [26,27,32,35,36].
Table 5. Experimental operating conditions.

#	Parameters	Values/ranges
1	Reynolds Number, Re (−)	988, 2170, 3700, 4700
2	Inlet Air Temperature (°C)	20, 25, 30, 35, 40
3	Ambient Temperature (°C)	20
4	Wall Heat Flux, qflux (kW/m2)	0.2−3.5, 0.3−6.0, 1−8.3, 0.8−11.0
2.3. Uncertainty analysis
An uncertainty analysis is vital to assess the consistency of the primary measured variables (current, voltage, pressure, velocity, and temperature) and the validity of the derived quantities. These variables are employed to obtain the derived quantities such as heat transfer rate, heat transfer coefficient, Reynolds number, and Nusselt number. The uncertainties in derived quantities are propagated based on the following equation:
(1)
where, R is the derived quantity. xi represents the measured variable. 
 represents the uncertainty in the measured variables.
2.4. Data reduction/analysis
This section describes the mathematical equations and empirical correlation applied to estimate derived parameters and process the measured data. Converting unprocessed experimental measurements into valuable physical quantities needed for performance analysis and comparison. These parameters were recorded by a data logger, which in turn was connected to calibrated instruments, such as hot wire anemometers and thermocouples.
The air mass flow rate can be obtained based on the average air velocity (Vav), air density (ρ), and cross-section area (Ac) using the following equation:
(2)
The air density is obtained based on the average air temperature (Tav) between the inlet and outlet of the air duct, which in turn is obtained as follows:
(3)
Reynolds number is calculated based on the air density, average velocity, cylindrical cell diameter, and air viscosity, as follows [50]:
(4)
The Re number in equation (4) is calculated based on the average air velocities, with reference to the diameter of the cylindrical lithium battery (D).
The air arithmetic mean temperature can be obtained depending on average heated wall temperature (
) using the following equation:
(5)
The average heated cylinder wall temperature is calculated based on the following equation:
(6)
where, n is number of thermocouples readings.
Others crucial parameters for the thermal performance of the battery module are the maximum temperature (Tmax) and the maximum temperature difference (ΔT) between surfaces/walls temperatures. The maximum temperature difference (ΔTmax), average temperature rise (ΔTav,rise) can be given by the following equations:
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
where, Tinitial is the initial temperature of cell. Tmax represents the maximum temperature through the battery module. and ΔTi,rise represents the temperature rise through each cell. 
 represents the average temperature rise of all cells in the module.
The standard deviation of the temperature rise (
) can be calculated from the following equation:
(12)
In this investigation, the energy consumption for overcoming the cylindrical cells of the battery module flow resistance was taken into account. The ratio of the energy consumed to supply the air-cooling to the heat removed by it is known as the performance factor [50]. This variable is a measure of the air-cooling system performance factor and is written as:
(13)
The heat dissipation (Qd) can be obtained from the following equation.
(14)
The consumed energy (Pf) can be calculated using the following equation.
(15)
The heat generation is determined, as the following:
(16)
where, n number of cells, I and V are the electrical current and voltage.
The wall heat flux is obtained based electrical current and voltage using the following equation:
(17)
where, n is the number of cell. As is the surface area of the cell.
Nusselt number is calculated using the following equation:
(18)
where, hav is the average heat transfer coefficient, D is cylinder cell diameter, and kf is air thermal conductivity.
(19)
The following equation is used to obtain Reynolds number based on the air density, maximum velocity, cylindrical cell diameter, and air viscosity, as follows [50]:
(20)
The maximum air velocity is determined based on cylindrical LIB diameter, Transverse pitch, and inlet air velocity at the gap between the cells, as following [51,52]:
(21)
The pressure drop/loss (ΔP) in the flow path through the gap between the cells of the battery module is calculated based on the Žukauskas correlation, as in the following equation [51,53].
(22)
where, NL is row number of heated cylindrical cell. f is the friction factor. 
 is the correction factor.
The pressure drop can also be represented in terms of the Euler number which can be defined in the following equation [54].
(23)
For the overview of experimental data of Žukauskas [55], the following empirical correlation was provided to calculate Nusselt number, as follows:
(24)
where, the constants are C2 = 0.27 and m = 0.63. Remax is Reynolds number based on the maximum air velocity. Pr is Prandtl number. Prw is Prandtl number based on the wall temperature.
The thermal enhancement factor (THEF), which simultaneously computes the air heater's hydraulic and thermal performance, was provided by Antony et al. [56], as following:
(25)
where, f represents friction factor of air heater with cylinderical cell wall. fref is friction factor of base model.
3. Results and discussion
The experiments were carried out based on different wide ranges of operating conditions in terms of inlet air temperature, Reynolds numbers, and heat fluxes to assess the thermal performances of air-cooled cylindrical cells of the battery module.
3.1. Variation of average wall temperature under different operating conditions
Fig. 4a–e shows the variation of average wall temperature of cells of the battery module with the heat fluxes at various Reynolds numbers and the inlet air temperatures. The balance between the applied heat flux and the convective heat transfer capacity of the cooled air, which is clearly affected by the Reynolds number, strongly controls the wall cell temperature. The temperature increase is contrariwise proportional with the heat transfer coefficient by convection and proportional with the applied heat load. The maximum temperature is reached at lower Reynolds number (i.e., Re = 988) at different values of inlet air temperature. Thus, at higher Reynolds numbers, the wall cell temperature tends to decrease significantly for the same heat flux. Fig. 5a–e displays temperature distributions alongside various thermocouple places for different Reynolds numbers and applied heat fluxes. It was shown how the temperature measured by the thermometers of the cell wall changed at different positions of the coolant Reynolds number along the test section. The cell wall temperature is reached the maximum value at the lowest Reynolds number among all thermocouples for all values of the applied heat fluxes at inlet air temperature of 25 °C. This is because of the reality that a lower Reynolds number, lead to in a higher increase in the cell wall temperature and less heat transfer by convection mode. Because the cooling medium is less capable to transfer heat, the temperature increase downstream is more obvious at lower Reynolds number.
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (964KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Average wall Temperature varaition with heat fluxes for different Re numbers and inlet air temperatures: (a) 20 °C, (b) 25 °C, (c) 30 °C, (d) 35 °C, (e) 40 °C.

Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (693KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Temperature variation for different thermocouples readings along the air flow direction with different Reynolds number and heat fluxes: (a) qflux = 1.35 kW/m2, (b) qflux = 2.1 kW/m2, (c) qflux = 2.5 kW/m2, (d) qflux = 3.0 kW/m2, (e) qflux = 3.5 kW/m2.

3.2. Effect of Re numbers and heat flux rates
Fig. 6, Fig. 7 display how the maximum temperature rise and maximum temperature difference, respectively, varies with Reynolds number of coolant medium for different applied heat fluxes (i.e., heat load). As expected, at higher Reynolds numbers, heat transfer is improved by convection mode, where the increased inlet air velocity significantly reduces the maximum temperature rise. Based on these findings, the higher Reynolds numbers are necessary to maintain safe operating temperatures. Fig. 8 exhibits how Reynold numbers influences the average temperature increase (ΔTav,rise) for various applied heat fluxes at an inlet air temperature of 25 °C. The average temperature rise falls as the coolant Reynolds number rises, underscoring the close relationship between Reynolds number and thermal performance. Insufficient cooling capacity is indicated by ΔTav,rise reaching value about 9 °C at lower applied heat flux. The system appears to be approaching an efficient convective regime at higher flow rates, as evidenced by the substantial decrease in the ΔTav,rise that occurs when Reynolds number increased from 988 to 2170. After that, the pace of improvement becomes less significant.
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (377KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Variation of maximum temperature rise with Reynolds numbers at different applied heat fluxes: 1.35, 2.1, 2.5, 3.0, and 3.5 kW/m2 with inlet air temperature of 25 °C.

Fig. 7
Download: Download high-res image (382KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. The maximum temperature differences with Re numbers at different applied heat fluxes: 1.35, 2.1, 2.5, 3.0, and 3.5 kW/m2 with inlet air temperature of 25 °C.

Fig. 8
Download: Download high-res image (367KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. The average temperature rise with Reynolds number at different applied heat fluxes: 1.35, 2.1, 2.5, 3.0, and 3.5 kW/m2 with inlet air temperature of 25 °C.

The variation of the parameter σΔT/rise (i.e., the standard deviation of the temperature rise) is illustrated in Fig. 9 for different applied heat fluxes. Increasing the fluid Reynolds numbers usually lowers the σΔT/rise for all applied heat fluxes, signifying better temperature uniformity transported about by augmented convective cooling. The drop in the σΔT/rise becomes more steady as Reynolds numbers increased (up to 4700), signifying lessening yields in thermal uniformity enhancement at higher flow rates.
Fig. 9
Download: Download high-res image (335KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Variation of standard deviation of temperature rise with Re numbers at different applied heat fluxes: 1.35, 2.1, 2.5, 3.0, and 3.5 kW/m2 with inlet air temperature of 25 °C.

3.3. Analysis of thermal performance
Fig. 10a–e shows how Re number (i.e. flow velocity) affects heat dissipation (Qd), for different range of heat generation and different inlet air velocity. This figure reveals how efficiently the coolant supports cylindrical cells of the battery module performance comparative to the energy dissipated on cooling. For all figures in terms of different inlet air temperature a higher Re number improves the thermal capacity of the heat sink. This is a result of enhanced forced convective heat transfer; the faster airflow carries away the heat at the cylindrical cell temperature surface more significantly. For all operating conditions, it can be seen that maximum heat dissipation of about 420 W was achieved at Re number of 4700 with inlet temperature of 20 °C. This characteristic is vital to avoid thermal runaway and to enhance battery performance and cycle life.
Fig. 10
Download: Download high-res image (906KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 10. Behavior of heat dissipation with Re numbers at different heat generation and inlet air temperatures: (a) Tin = 20 °C, (b) Tin = 25 °C, (c) Tin = 30 °C, (d) Tin = 35 °C, and (e) Tin = 40 °C.

Fig. 11 shows the variation between the average heat dissipation and Reynolds numbers in terms of the range of inlet air temperature, as the Reynolds number increases, average heat dissipation gets better across all levels of heat fluxes. The Reynolds number has a big effect on how well a convective cooling system can get rid of heat. This is because Re controls the flow rate and the heat transfer coefficient that goes with it. Increasing the Reynolds number (Re) in cooling systems increases convection heat transfer, which means that heat is being removed from the surface more quickly. It can be seen that the maximum value of heat dissipation is reached at Re number of 4700.
Fig. 11
Download: Download high-res image (264KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 11. Variation of average heat dissipation with Re numbers at range of inlet air temperature.

Fig. 12 shows the change of energy consumption with Reynolds number in terms of the range of inlet air temperature. The benefit of increased convection makes energy consumption go up with Reynolds number. More airflow (i.e., higher Re) needs more energy, particularly when the heat load is low. But when the heat generation is higher, the extra airflow makes more sense from a cooling point of view, even if energy use keeps going up. While a higher Reynolds number (i.e., more airflow) enhances heat removal, it also raises the energy consumption of cooling, which lowers cooling performance factor, as shown in Fig. 12. This term of performance factor (i.e., energy index) most possible is the ratio of the energy input needed to drive the airflow (fan power) to the cooling benefit (heat removed/dissipation or temperature reduction).
Fig. 12
Download: Download high-res image (286KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 12. Variation of average energy consumption (Pf) and performance factor (ϕ) with Re numbers in terms of average inlet air temperature.

3.4. Analysis of thermal and hydraulic parameters
As shown in Fig. 13, with risen Re number continuously increases pressure drop, which should be weighed against better heat dissipation. This rise was ascribed to increased friction between coolant and cell surface, which is directly related to increased Re number and raises the need for driving more power. Consequently, the Re number plays a critical role not only in evaluating the performance of heat transfer in forced-air cooling of high-energy-density cylindrical cells of the battery module but also in ruling the associated pressure drop. However, to maintain airflow, the corresponding rise in ΔP necessitates more fan or blower power, which increases system energy consumption and lowers overall performance factor. It was found that the mean absolute error of 13.81 % was achieved from the comparison between the current work with Žukauskas empirical correlation [55]. With increase Re number, the Euler number (Eu) decreases in the system of cylindrical cells of the battery module, as shown in Fig. 14. This implies that, for cylindrical cells of the battery module air cooling, flow becomes comparatively more aerodynamically efficient with higher Re number, but at the expenditure of higher blowing energy. The comparison between the current study with the empirical correlation from the previous work of Žukauskas [55] with mean absolute error of 5.72 % in terms of Euler number. Moreover, the average Nusselt number was compared with the empirical correlation of Žukauskas [55], as shown in Fig. 15. This comparison showed that the mean absolute relative error was 12.95 %. The mean absolute relative error was obtained using the formula: (xexperimental − xpredicted)/xexperimental.
Fig. 13
Download: Download high-res image (334KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 13. Comparison of pressure drop (ΔP) obtained from the current study with Žukauskas empirical correlation [55].

Fig. 14
Download: Download high-res image (266KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 14. Comparison of Euler number (Eu) obtained from the current study with Žukauskas empirical correlation [55].

Fig. 15
Download: Download high-res image (417KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 15. Comparison of average Nusselt number obtained from the current study with Žukauskas empirical correlation [55].

Fig. 16a–e shows the variation of average Nusselt number (Nuave) with heat fluxes for different Re numbers and inlet air temperatures. The Nusselt number first varies minimally with rising heat flux for the majority of inlet air temperatures (20–35 °C), but it thereafter slightly drops as heat flux increased. This exhibits that, the improvement of convective heat transfer is less at larger heat fluxes possibly as a result of thermal boundary layer thickening. It can be seen that the highest average Nusselt numbers were achieved at inlet air temperature of 20 °C through almost all heat fluxes. Accordingly, inlet air with temperature above 20 °C decreases the temperature difference between the heated surface and the cooling air, reducing the effectiveness of heat transfer, whereas cooler inlet air enhances convective heat transfer. Fig. 17 shows the variation of the average Nusselt number with Re numbers at different inlet air temperatures. It can be revealed that for all inlet air temperatures, the average Nusselt number rises with Reynolds number according to convective heat transfer concept. However, dramatically lower Nu values at the same Re at higher inlet air temperatures indicated that the thermal performance is governed by both temperature gradient and flow rate parameters. On the other hand, this effect is strongly modulated by the temperature of the inlet air: for the same Re number and Nu number decreases as inlet air temperature. Based on the uncertainty analysis, the mean percentage uncertainty for Reynolds number (Re) and the average Nusselt number (Nu) are ± (3.8–8.6 %) and ± (3.2–5.7 %), respectively.
Fig. 16
Download: Download high-res image (964KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 16. Variation of average Nusselt number with heat fluxes at different Re numbers and inlet air temperatures: (a) Tin = 20 °C, (b) Tin = 25 °C, (c) Tin = 30 °C, (d) Tin = 35 °C, and (e) Tin = 40 °C.

Fig. 17
Download: Download high-res image (304KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 17. Average Nusselt number with Re numbers at different inlet air temperatures of (Tin = 20, 25, 30, 35, and 40 °C).

Fig. 18 shows the variation of the thermal–hydraulic enhancement factor (THEF) with inlet air temperature for different Re numbers. Across the cases of Re numbers of 988 and 2170, the THEF values show only, steady-state as inlet air temperature rises, supporting that the effectiveness of the enhancement approach is largely independent of inlet air temperature for average heat gneration. However, as the Reynolds number is raised, it is observed that the difference between THEF values decreased with increasing inlet air temperature for Re numbers values of 3700 and 4700. The majority of curves keep THEF values over 1.0, indicating that the enhancement techniques used offer better thermal-hydraulic performance than the case of Re number of 988. Furthermore, the majority of cases feature THEF values exceeding 1.0, confirming that the enhancement techniques consistently yield better thermal-hydraulic behavior than the baseline configuration. As shown in Fig. 18, the maximum value of the thermal enhancement factor (THEF) is obtained at a high Re number of 4700 and a low inlet air temperature of 20 °C. This resulted in achieving the highest thermal performance effectiveness in terms of the highest Nu number compared with the friction coefficient. However, the mean percentage uncertainty of the thermal enhancement factor (THEF) of ± (0.9–2.4 %) was obtained.
Fig. 18
Download: Download high-res image (306KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 18. Variation of thermal enhancement factor (THEF) with inlet air temperature for different Re numbers (988, 2170, 3700, and 4700).

4. Conclusions
This work aims to investigate the cooling performance of an air-cooling battery thermal management system tailored for longitudinal compact arrangement of 18650 Li-ion cells. Standard cases are utilized in the battery configuration to investigate the effects of wide ranges of operating conditions.
Experimental results showed that a maximum cooling performance factor of 170 % was achieved compared to an average power consumption of 26 W. Also, for all operating conditions, it can be seen that maximum heat dissipation of about 420 W was attained at inlet air temperature of 20 °C and Re number of 4700. Moreover, The results showed that the maximum thermal–hydraulic enhancement factor (THEF) of 4 was obtained with inlet air temperature of 20 °C and Re number of 4700. The fact that most curves maintain THEF values above 1.0 suggests that the enhancement methods employed provide superior thermal-hydraulic performance in comparison to the Re number of 988 at the inlet air temperature of 20 °C. From the comparison with published empirical correlation, it was showed that the mean absolute error of 13.81 % was achieved. A broad battery matrix effectively reduces temperature variation between cells; however, it necessitates a high cooling air flow rate, leading to increased power consumption. The results highlighted that heat transfer and pressure drop both increase with Reynolds number (Re), which enhances cooling performance factor but also increases aerodynamic resistance. Therefore, the cooling strategy needs to aim for a balance between aerodynamic efficiency and thermal management effectiveness.