Abstract
Due to the existence of ice in rock fissures and the complex ice–rock interactions, the exact role of fissure ice in altering the mechanical behaviour of frozen rock mass remains unclear. In this study a series of uniaxial compression experiments were conducted on frozen sandstone samples that bearing precut fissures of different angles at both freezing and room temperatures. The failure process of samples was recorded using a high-speed camera. Besides, a particle flow code-based simulation, addressing the role of fissure ice, was performed. The results indicate that: (1) Freezing does not alter the trend of strength variation concerning the fissure angle, but it does strengthen the samples significantly. (2) At both room and subzero temperatures, the crack initiation mode of the specimens showed a changing trend of "tensile cracking → shear cracking → tensile cracking" as the fissure angle increased. (3) The change in fissure angle leads to a change in the stress state at the fracture end, while the fissure ice, through ice–rock interaction, further alters the fracture's stress state, thereby affecting the initiation and expansion mode of the fracture. Based on the simulation results, three strengthening mechanisms of fissure ice are proposed: (I) under compression, the ice acts as a filling support; (II) the fissure ice shortens the fracture length, resulting in a reduction of the stress intensity factor at the fracture ends; (III) under tensile or shear states, the ice acts as a binder. The above strengthening effects of fissure ice act simultaneously or alternatively at different fissure angles.

Article highlights
(1)
Freezing does not alter the variation trend of strength with the fissure angle, but it strengthens the samples significantly.

(2)
The mechanical properties of frozen fissured sandstone are controlled by both the freezing effect and the fissure angle.

(3)
Fissure ice could provide resistance to compressive, tensile and shearing load, and thus strengthens frozen rock mass.

Similar content being viewed by others

Experimental study and particle flow code numerical simulation of crack propagation and failure characteristics of prefabricated double-fissured rock samples
Article 20 December 2024

Spatial Failure Mode Analysis of Frozen Sandstone Under Uniaxial Compression Based on CT Technology
Article 04 April 2022

Meso cracking mechanism of ice saturated cross fissured sandstone under dynamic loading
Article Open access
22 May 2025
Explore related subjects
Discover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning.
Cryospheric Science
Fissure seal
Geology
Mechanobiology
Solid Mechanics
Structural Geology
1 Introduction
In high-altitude and high-latitude regions, numerous coal surface mines are excavated in permafrost layers, forming high and steep mining slopes (Wang et al. 2022a, 2022b; Cao et al 2017). The stability of such slopes is determined by the mechanical properties of frozen rock mass (Jia et al. 2022, 2020a, b). With the exposure to air convection and sunlight after excavation, the frozen rock mass melts and softens, which is further enhanced by blast or mechanical vibration, consequently, stability of the mining slopes reduces (Wang et al. 2021). Besides, the continuous global warming accelerates the melting of frozen rock mass and increases the failure risk of mining slopes (Wang et al. 2022a, b). Therefore, investigating the mechanical properties of frozen rock mass becomes more urgent.

At present, a lot of research on the mechanical properties and crack propagation mechanism of fissured rock mass has been conducted at room temperature (Wong and Einstein 2009; Morgan et al. 2013; Yang and Jing 2011). Under different test conditions, such as strain rate response, confining pressure and fissure inclination to the mechanical properties of rock mass, the peak strength of fractured rock mass was found to increase significantly with the rise in the strain rate (Feng et al. 2022; Zhao et al. 2021; You et al. 2022). In contrast, the response of the elastic modulus of the rock mass to different strain rates does not change considerably (Chen et al. 2022; Huang et al. 2016a, b). The ability to resist expansion deformation is enhanced with the increase in the confining pressure, compressive strength, residual strength and elastic modulus (Tuhkuri and Polojärvi 2018; Lee and Jeon 2011; Wong and Zhang 2014). The strength and the energy dissipation density of the fractured sandstone are positively correlated with the increase in the radial confining pressure and strain rate. In contrast, the dynamic elastic modulus, failure strain and energy utilisation ratio exhibit a pronounced effect of enhanced radial confining pressure (Bobet and Einstein 1998; Park and Bobet 2009; Bobet 2000; Wang et al. 2018; Zhang and Wong 2013a, b).

However, in the permafrost area, water in pore or fractures withing rock mass turns into ice, significantly changing the mechanical properties of fractured rock masses. Some scholars have found that the volume expansion of water–ice in fractured rock mass deteriorates the rock mass (Tan et al. 2011a, b; Jia et al. 2020a, b). But on the other hand, the adhesion between rock and ice will strengthen the mechanical properties of rock mass (Han et al. 2022). In the mechanical test of rock mass, the strength of the frozen fissure rock mass is much lower than that of the intact rock sample because of the unique static pressure yield characteristics of ice; in addition, the fissure toughness of rock mass increases exponentially with the decrease in the freezing temperature (Huang et al. 2023a, b). The mechanical properties of frozen fractured rock mass are greatly influenced under different test conditions, such as temperature, confining pressure and fissure angle (Bai et al. 2020). The peak strength and elastic modulus of the frozen fractured rock mass increase with the increase in confining pressure. The strength of the frozen fissured rock mass gradually decreases with the increase in fissure inclination, and the reduction amplitude becomes smaller and smaller. When the fissure inclination is greater than 30°, the strength of the sample is almost unchanged (Yao et al. 2022). Given the above results, basic understanding on the mechanical properties of frozen rock mass has been gained. Nonetheless, due to the existence of ice in rock fissures and the complex ice–rock interactions (Mamot et al. 2018; Su et al. 2022; Huang et al. 2023a, b; Li, et al. 2024), several fundamental issues remain unclear, especially that the exact role of fissure ice in altering the mechanical behaviour of frozen rock mass.

Although through laboratory experiments one can obtain the first-hand laws of the mechanical behaviours of rock mass, obtaining all the information from experiments is impossible. Thus, it is necessary to employ numerical simulation in this field. Among various simulation methods, the particle flow code (PFC) is widely used to reveal the development of microcracks and force chain evolution in fractured rock mass, that cannot be directly observed in laboratory experiments (Gao et al. 2023; Zhang and Wong 2013a, b; Zhu et al.2021). Through a PFC-based simulation of the compressive failure of frozen fissured rock, the mechanisms of ice–rock interaction in the fissure and ice’s strengthening effect, which are fundamental but intricate, are expected to be revealed in the present study.

Aiming to investigation of the mechanical behaviour of frozen fissured sandstone, uniaxial compression experiments were conducted on frozen sandstone samples that bearing precut fissures of different angles (α = 0°, 15°, 30°, 45°, 60°, 75° and 90°) at both freezing (–10 ℃) and room (25 ℃) temperatures. The whole process of crack initiation, propagation and coalescence to final failure of samples was recorded using a high-speed camera. Besides, a PFC-based simulation, addressing the role of fissure ice, of the uniaxial compression experiments was performed, their results are compared. Accordingly, the ice–rock interaction processes at different dip angles and their impact on the stress state around the fissure is discussed.

2 Methodology
2.1 Specimen preparation
In this study, medium-grained yellow sandstone was selected as the research object. The wave velocity of sandstone was measured using a NM-4A non-metallic ultrasonic analyser, its average P-wave velocity is 2459 m/s, and its porosity is 17.4% (Table 1). Mineral composition of the used sandstone is determined by XRD test, the result indicates a composition of quartz (73.4%), feldspar (18.3%), mica (3.7%) and kaolinite (4.6%). A block of sandstone was processed into dozens of cuboid rock samples of 120 mm × 60 mm × 60 mm bearing a precut straight fissure at the centre using a high-pressure water flow cutting machine. The precut fissure length is 20 mm, and its width is 2 mm. The fissure angle α (the angle between the fissure and the horizontal direction) is set as α = 0°, 15°, 30°, 45°, 60°, 75° and 90° (Fig. 1a-h). Three identical specimens were processed for each fissure angle.

Table 1 Average material properties of the samples
Full size table
Fig. 1
figure 1
Sandstone samples bearing a precut fissure (a–h) and the low-temperature uniaxial compression test system (i) α is the fissure angle)

Full size image
Before the test, the samples were first placed in an oven and dried at 105℃ for 48 h. Next, the dried samples were saturated in the vacuum saturator for 24 h, and the saturated water mass is determined by subtracting the dried mass from saturated mass of sample. Saturated water content is achieved by dividing the saturated water mass into dried mass of sample. While porosity is calculated by the gravimetric method, the calculation formula is as follow:

(1)
where, 
 is porosity; 
 are respective the volume and mass of water absorbed after the sample is saturated; 
 is the density of pure water; 
 is the volume of the sample.

Uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) and elastic modulus of the used sandstone at room temperature were tested via an electro-hydraulic servo control system (YZW50B), the results are listed in Table 1.

2.2 Experimental design
The uniaxial compression tests of frozen samples were conducted via an electro-hydraulic servo control system (YZW50B) equipped with an environmental chamber (TMS 8018) which can freeze the samples (Fig. 1i). The testing system can provide a maximum axial force of 500 kN. The temperature control accuracy of the environmental chamber is ± 0.05℃, and the minimum temperature can reach −30 ℃. The chamber has a double-glazed window through which the test process can be observed. The failure process of samples was recorded with a high-speed camera (FASTCAM Mini UX100) with a maximum acquisition rate of 4000 fps (Fig. 2).

Fig. 2
figure 2
Stress–strain curves of fissure sandstone with different fissure dip angles at 25 ℃ (a) and −10 ℃ (b) (T is the temperature, α is the fissure angle)

Full size image
The experiment was carried out as follow. A saturated sample was firstly wrapped with plastic films and then placed in the environmental chamber for 6 h to freeze at −10 ℃. Then, water is quickly injected into the precut fissure with an injection syringe, and another 4 h’ freezing was conducted. Afterwards, the uniaxial compression test was conducted with a loading rate of 0.05 mm/s. When the sandstone sample was loaded, the high-speed camera is turned on to capture the failure process of the sample.

3 Results
3.1 Stress–strain curves
Figure 2 illustrates the stress–strain curves of samples with various crack inclination angles at subzero and room temperatures. The pre-peak stress–strain curves of samples can basically be divided into three stages: a downward concave nonlinear stage followed by a linear stage and an upward convex nonlinear stage at last. Almost without exception, the downward concave nonlinear stage, probably the stage of pore compaction, makes up most of the whole curve, while the linear stage, presumably the elastic deformation stage, and upward convex nonlinear stage, characterized by microcrack propagation, are short. Especially, the third stage can not be observed in some cases such as the samples with α = 0° and 45°.

Obviously, freezing has strongly altered the stress–strain curves of samples in two ways: both peak stress and failure strain of samples at −10 °C are much bigger than at 25 ℃, and the pore compaction stage is distinctly extended. Moreover, the fissure angle is another key factor that influences samples’ stress–strain curves, as evidenced by the difference in their peak stress and failure strain.

3.2 Uniaxial compression strength (UCS) and elastic modulus
Figure 3 depicts the variation of samples’ UCS and modulus with different fissure angles at room and subzero temperatures, which clearly shows a strengthening effect by freezing on the samples.

Fig. 3
figure 3
Curves of fissure inclination angle versus strength (a) and elastic modulus (b) at different temperatures

Full size image
(1)
Uniaxial compression strength (UCS).

Freezing does not change the variation trend of UCS with the fissure angle (Fig. 3a). With the increase in fissure angle, the strength of samples at both room and subzero temperatures varies following a downward concave trend. The minimum strength of fissured sandstone appears at α = 60°, while the maximum strength appears at α = 90° in both cases. The UCS of samples under freezing is much higher than that under normal temperature (Fig. 3a).

(2)
Elastic modulus.

Freezing does not change the variation trend of elastic modulus with the fissure angle as well (Fig. 3b). With the increase in fissure angle, the elastic modulus of samples at both room and subzero temperatures varies following a downward concave trend. The minimum strength of fissured sandstone at room temperature appears at α = 60°, while that at subzero temperatures appears at α = 30°. The maximum elastic modulus appears at α = 90° in both cases. The elastic modulus of samples under freezing is much higher than that under normal temperature (Fig. 3b).

Defining the strengthening factor 
 and 
 as follows:

(2)
(3)
where, 
 and 
 are the strength and elastic modulus of samples in the frozen state (MPa),
 and 
 are the strength and elastic modulus of samples at room temperature (MPa). Values of 
 and 
 of samples with different fissure angle are shown in Table 2, which shows that values of 
 and 
 vary with fissure angle and the former achieves the maximum value at α = 60°, while the latter at α = 30°, indicating a coupling effect of freezing and fissure angle on the mechanical behaviours of fissured sandstone.

Table 2 The increasing ratio of strength and elastic modulus with fissure angle at low temperatures
Full size table
3.3 Crack initiation analysis
Due to the randomness of the direction of the microcracks in the sandstone, the propagation directivity of the microcracks is also random, however, the propagation of the macrocracks usually exhibits pronounced directivity. The potential crack initiation types around a crack under far-field compressive stress include wing cracks and anti-wing cracks, which are the primary manifestations of tensile cracks, and coplanar and noncoplanar secondary cracks, which are usually the manifestations of shear cracks (Tan et al. 2011a, b). In the uniaxial compression test, the precut fissure tip is the stress concentration area for crack initiation and propagation. When the stress concentration intensity reaches the threshold value, the corresponding crack initiation will occur and then evolve into crack propagation (Tan et al. 2011a).

Figures 4 and 5 depict the crack initiation in samples at room and subzero temperatures. Clearly, both inclination angle and fissure ice alter the crack initiation modes (Table 3). At room temperature, the crack initiation mode shifts from tensile cracking (0° ≤ α ≤ 45°) to shear cracking (45° < α < 75°) and back to tensile cracking (α ≥ 75°) with α increasing from 0° to 90°. The crack initiation mode at each inclination angle is summarized in Table 3, which shows anti-wing cracking (α = 0°), wing cracking (α = 15°), anti-wing cracking (α = 30°), anti-wing cracking + shear cracking (α = 45°), shear cracking (α = 60°), anti-wing cracking (α = 75°) and wing cracking (α = 90°), respectively.

Fig. 4
figure 4
Cracking behaviour diagram of fissured sandstone at room temperature (a–g stands for different α values) (T = tensile, S = shear, S* = the stress level when crack initiates)

Full size image
Fig. 5
figure 5
Cracking behaviour diagram of frozen fissured sandstone (a–g stands for different α values) (T = tensile, S = shear, S* = the stress level when crack initiates)

Full size image
Table 3 Crack initiation mode and stress level in sandstone with different fissure angles
Full size table
At −10 °C, the overall variation of the crack initiation mode with the increase of α is basically the same with at room temperature (Table 3), that is tensile cracking (0° ≤ α ≤ 45°) to shear cracking (45° < α ≤ 75°) and back to tensile cracking (α > 75°). However, the crack initiation mode changes at some inclinations due to freezing. As α = 0°, the crack initiation mode transforms from anti-wing cracking at room temperature to wing cracking at −10 °C, besides, cracks initiate in the middle of the fissure rather than at fissure tips. As α = 30°, wing cracking occurs at −10 °C instead of anti-wing cracking at room temperature. Moreover, as α = 75°, anti-wing cracking at room temperature turns into shear cracking at −10 °C.

As shown in Table 3, the stress levels where crack initiates are different in samples with various inclination angles. Besides, after freezing the crack initiation stress levels in all samples are higher than at room temperature, indicating the strengthening effect by freezing and the fissure ice.

3.4 Crack coalescence and final failure
Results of three crack inclination angles, α = 0°, 60° and 90°, are analysed, which represent tensile and shear crack initiation mode respectively. Crack propagation and coalescence process can be observed from the crack propagation diagram of fractured sandstone in Fig. 6.

Fig. 6
figure 6
Crack coalescence in fissured sandstone with a 0°, 60° and 90° fissure angle at room temperature and frozen state (Arabic numbers marks the sequence of crack occurrence. S* = the stress level when crack initiates)

Full size image
(1)
α = 0°.

At room temperature, after crack initiates (crack 1 and 2), crack 3 propagates downward and connects with the precut fissure, creating an anti-wing tensile crack. As S*increases, a shear crack (crack 4) occurs at the lower tip of the precut fissure. When the load approaches the peak stress, crack 3 propagates upward and transforms into shear cracking (crack 5), and crack 4 grows downward to sample’s edge. As the loading reaches 99.2% of the peak stress, more secondary cracks (crack 6 and 7) are generated from the upper corner of the right side of the specimen and extend to the upper edge of the sample (Fig. 6a). At the frozen state, the fissure ice exhibits elastic deformation under load before crack initiates (crack 1 and 2). As S* increases, an anti-wing tensile crack occurs at the right tip of the fissure (crack 3) and fissure ice starts to break. Afterwards, a wing crack (crack 4) is generated at the right tip of the fissure. As S* increases further, tensile cracks 5 and 6 develop at the left tip of the fissure, accompanied by secondary shear cracks. When S* achieves the value of 99.8%, fissure ice is crushed and extruded, the sample finally breaks (Fig. 6d).

It's worth noting that the bedding plane of sandstone samples might alter the crack propagation path due to the strong anisotropy in mechanical properties caused by the layered structure (Jia et al. 2021). Strength or fracture toughness parallel to the bedding plane is usually significantly lower than that perpendicular to the bedding plane, crack propagation may thus be oriented toward the bedding-parallel direction. This phenomenon can be observed in Fig. 4a and Fig. 6a.

(2)
α = 60°.

At room temperature, shear cracking initiates (crack 1 and 2) and propagates to the top and bottom of the samples, resulting in an overall shear failure (Fig. 6b). At the frozen state, shear cracking initiates (crack 1 and 2) at both tips of the fissure and crack 1 soon transforms to tensile crack. With S* increases, tensile crack (crack 3) appears adjacent to crack 1 and transforms to shear crack soon and the fissure ice starts to break. As S* surpassing 99.8%, the fissure ice is sheared to break, the sample approaches final failure and exhibits an overall shear failure mode (Fig. 6e).

(3)
α = 90°.

At room temperature, tensile cracks initiate (crack 1 and 2) vertically at both fissure tips and propagate towards the top and bottom of the samples. Afterwards, shear crack 3 appears at the upper tip of crack 1 and grows upwards. Finally, crack 1 and 2 grow to the top and bottom edges of sample respectively, resulting in an overall tensile failure (Fig. 6c). At the frozen state, tensile cracks initiate (crack 1 and 2) at both tips of the fissure. Meanwhile, the fissure ice is compressed. With S* increases, debonding of the ice–rock interface can be observed at this stage. As S* approaching 95.6%, shear crack 3 initiates from crack 1 and the fissure ice is compressed to break. The sample exhibits an overall tensile failure mode as well (Fig. 6f).

4 PFC-based simulation on microcrack propagation
4.1 Model establishment and parameter determination
The discrete element method, particle flow code (PFC) is employed to simulate microcrack initiation and propagation process of frozen fissured sandstone under uniaxial compression. A two-dimensional numerical model bearing a penetrating crack and being the same size as the sample is used (Fig. 7). The contact model was set as a parallel bonding model, the loading mode is displacement-control, and the rate is 0.05 mm/s. Sandstone is composed by mineral particles and ice is composed by crystal particles, they are simulated by rounded particles in PFC2D simulation. In this study, the sizes of the mineral particles ranged from 0.8 to 1.5 mm, and those of the crystal particles ranged from 0.1 to 0.3 mm, such setting is made according to the fact that crystal grains in ice are usually smaller than mineral grains in sandstone (Tuhkuri and Polojärvi 2018; Jia et al. 2020a, b).

Fig. 7
figure 7
Comparison of experimental simulation and experimental results on the uniaxial compression of fissure sandstone

Full size image
The contacts within the model include rock–rock, rock–ice and ice–ice contacts which simulate the cementation between mineral particles, mineral particle and ice and crystal particles within ice, respectively. All contact parameters can be determined by trial-and-error to make the macro-mechanical parameters of the numerical model match the results of laboratory tests (Bai et al. 2020).

(1)
Contact parameters between mineral particles.

Contact parameters between mineral particles are calibrated based on the experimental results of dry sandstone sample at room temperature, since in this case only rock–rock contacts exist in the numerical model. Comparison of both the failure mode and stress–strain curve between numerical and experimental results are shown in Fig. 7a–c. Accordingly, the contact parameters of rock-rock are determined and listed in Table 4.

Table 4 Contact parameters used in this study
Full size table
(2)
Contact parameters between crystal particles.

Tuhkuri and Polojärvi (2018). conducted a PFC-based simulation on the compression failure process of ice and calibrated the contact parameters of ice-ice contact. In this study, the results in Tuhkuri, et al. are directly used.

(3)
Contact parameters of the ice–rock interface.

It is feasible to determine the contact parameters of the ice–rock interface based on the experimental results of frozen sample with a fissure filled by ice, given that contact parameters of rock-rock and ice-ice contacts are settled. By comparing the failure mode and stress–strain curve between numerical and experimental results (Fig. 7d–f), the contact parameters of ice–rock are determined and listed in Table 4.

4.2 Force chain and crack propagation analysis based on PFC simulation
Corresponding to the crack growth observation during the laboratory test, the cracking behaviours of sandstone samples with fissure angle α = 0°, 60° and 90° are simulated at room and subzero temperatures. Figures 8, 9 and 10 depict the evolution of force chain and crack growth of samples during compression, wherein green lines mark compressive force, red lines mark tensile force, black lines mark cracks and blue lines mark fissure ice, S* represents the stress level of sample.

Fig. 8
figure 8
The crack propagation force chain diagram of the samples with 0° fissure at room temperature and frozen state (green lines mark compressive force, red lines mark tensile force, black lines mark cracks and blue lines mark fissure ice, S* represents the stress level of sample)

Full size image
Fig. 9
figure 9
The crack propagation force chain diagram of the samples with 60° fissure at room temperature and frozen state (green lines mark compressive force, red lines mark tensile force, black lines mark cracks and blue lines mark fissure ice, S* represents the stress level of sample)

Full size image
Fig. 10
figure 10
The crack propagation force chain diagram of the samples with 90° fissure at room temperature and frozen state (green lines mark compressive force, red lines mark tensile force, black lines mark cracks and blue lines mark fissure ice, S* represents the stress level of sample)

Full size image
(1)
α = 0°

By comparing the simulation results of samples at room and subzero temperatures (Fig. 8), it can be found that crack initiation in the sample at the frozen state is different in the following ways: (1) Before crack initiates in the sample simulated at room temperature, compressive force concentrates at the left and right tips of the fissure, and tensile force concentrates at the top and bottom walls of the fissure; while, in the sample at frozen state, due to the supporting of fissure ice, tensile force concentration zones appear far away from the fissure. (2) Crack initiation is latter than that at room temperature, and with fewer microcracks, this is consistent with the experimental results (Fig. 6). (3) The fissure ice inhibits crack propagation, and the crack growth pattern is changed.

(2)
α = 60°

As shown by Fig. 9, crack initiation in the sample at the frozen state is latter than at room temperature, which implies the strengthening effect of freezing. Despite the amount of microcracks are significantly less at the frozen state than at room temperature, the fissure ice does not change the crack propagation pattern in samples with fissure angles around 60°. Both samples exhibit an overall shear failure mode. However, the fissure ice alters the force chain remarkably, there are more tensile stress concentration zones far away from the fissure and less compressive concentration zones around the fissure.

(3)
α = 90°

As in the above two case, crack initiation in the sample at the frozen state is latter than at room temperature and with less microcracks. Besides, the fissure ice enhances the compressive force concentration around the fissure, implying its supporting effect. Consequently, the overall failure modes are not the same (Fig. 10).

Such results indicate that within certain angle intervals (around 60°) the singularity in stress field created by the fissure determines the initiation and propagation of cracks, rather than the filling materials (ice in this case) in the fissure. In other cases, however, the filling material may play a significant role such as in samples with smaller or larger fissure angles (< 45° or > 75°).

5 Discussion
5.1 Strengthening mechanisms by freezing
The strength and elastic modulus of fissured sandstone significantly increase under frozen conditions, and the stress required to initiate cracking in samples with the same fissure angle also significantly increases after freezing. This indicates that the freezing of pore water and the filling of fractures with ice significantly reinforce the fissured sandstone. The reasons for the freezing strengthening effect can be analyzed from two aspects: the change in strength of the frozen sandstone itself, and the interaction between the filling ice and the fractures. Sandstone is a typical porous medium; as the temperature drops below zero, the pore water gradually freezes into ice. Due to the influence of capillary forces and surface adsorption, the freezing point of part of the pore water is significantly reduced, resulting in some pore water remaining unfrozen at low temperatures (Jia et al. 2020a; Wang et al. 2023). The unfrozen water in the pores primarily exists in the form of water films between the pore ice and the pore walls, which can transmit stress and serve as a binder. Hence, the strength of the frozen sandstone is controlled by the content of ice and unfrozen water in the pores (Jia et al. 2020a; Wang et al. 2023).

From the perspective of pore scale, the support and cementation of ice on the sandstone framework improve the mechanical properties of the rock such as compressive and tensile strength. Additionally, the strength of the ice itself increases with the decrease of freezing temperature, further enhancing the support and cementation effect on the rock framework (Jia et al. 2022). Therefore, the freezing of pore ice has a significant strengthening effect on the sandstone matrix.

At the fracture scale, the effect of fracture ice on sandstone strength is also a strengthening effect, with three mechanisms: (I) under compression, ice serves as a filling support; (II) ice filling pores shortens the length of fractures, and according to fracture mechanics theory, a reduction in length leads to a decrease in the stress intensity factor at the fracture tips; (III) under tension or shear, ice acts as an adhesive (Wang et al. 2024). The strengthening mechanism I is influenced by both the volume of ice in the fractures and the compressive strength of the ice itself, which increases with decreasing temperature (Mamot et al. 2018; Aksenov et al. 2019). Strengthening mechanism II is mainly determined by the volume of ice, hence it has a negative correlation with freezing temperature. Strengthening mechanism III primarily depends on the adhesive strength at the ice–rock interface, which is negatively correlated with the thickness of the unfrozen water film, while the thickness of the unfrozen water film decreases with temperature reduction (Jia et al. 2019).

5.2 Effects of fissure ice and fissure inclination
The experimental results indicate that the mechanical properties of frozen fissured sandstone are governed by the dual control of the freezing action and the fissure angle. The alteration of the fissure angle results in a change in the stress state at the fissure ends, while the fissure ice further modifies the stress state through ice–rock interactions, subsequently affecting the initiation and propagation patterns of the fractures. Therefore, to elucidate the mechanisms by which fissure ice and the fissure angle influence the mechanical properties of frozen rock masses, it is necessary to discuss the ice–rock interaction processes at different dip angles and their impact on the stress state around the fissure.

In uniaxial compression, ice within the fissure experiences normal force pc, tip pressure pt at the crack apexes, and tangential shear force q (Fig. 11a). At smaller fissure inclinations (taking α = 0∘as an example), the ice is under compression and provides resistance to vertical compression, which is the supporting effect (Fig. 11b). Besides, ice's infilling effects can mitigate stress concentration at the fissure tips (Fig. 11e). Consequently, tensile cracks tend to initiate near the center of the fracture (Fig. 5a). As the load continues to increase, the compressive failure of the ice within the fracture reduces its supporting and infilling effects, leading to the initiation of shear cracks at the ends of the fissure (Fig. 11c). The specimen's ultimate failure is often accompanied by the crushing and extrusion of the ice (Fig. 11d).

Fig. 11
figure 11
Effect of freezing state on fissure process of fissure sandstone

Full size image
At larger dip angles (taking α = 60° as an example), the fissure ice is subjected to compressive shear stress, and its supporting and filling effects are not as significant as at smaller angles. The initiation of shear cracking occurs at the ends of the fractures (Figs. 5e, 11f). As the load increases, the tangential shear force q surpasses the cohesion at the ice–rock interface, shear debonding occurs at this interface (Fig. 11g, i). However, the ice continues to support the precut fissure, suppressing further crack propagation. As the ice is sheared and fragmented, a continuous shear slip failure surface eventually forms (Fig. 11h).

When the fracture inclination is parallel to the loading direction (α = 90°), the normal stress on the fissure ice, pc, transforms into tensile stress, indicating that the fissure ice is under vertical compression and lateral tension state (Fig. 11j). The fissure ice mainly provides resistance to compression and tension through the supporting and cohesion effects, respectively. Tensile cracks first appear at the ends of the fissure (Fig. 5g). With increasing pressure, the ice–rock interface debonds due to the normal tensile stress, and at this point, the ice primarily provides support (Fig. 11k, m). As the vertical pressure continues to increase, the ice is compressed while the fractures continue to extend towards the ends (Fig. 11l).

As a solid with relatively high strength and rigidity, ice fills and bonds with defects, forming an ice–rock interface with high adhesive strength. Ice can support pre-existing fractures and resist deformation in shear and normal directions during compression. The cementation of the ice–rock interface provides resistance against deformation both tangentially and normally. In the early stages of compressive failure, the support from ice in the fracture's tangential and normal directions effectively inhibits the propagation of wing cracks.

In the later stages of compressive failure, the influence of the fill ice varies with the fissure angle. At smaller fissure angles (0° to 30°), the normal pressure from the ice is higher, and the strength of the ice provides the main resistance to the expansion of shear cracks. This is why the ice is crushed by compressive-shear damage before the sandstone fails. When the fissure angle is larger (45° to 75°), the normal pressure on the ice is lower, and the cementation of the ice–rock interface provides the main resistance to the expansion of shear cracks. Therefore, when the sample fails, the ice primarily undergoes shear failure along the ice–rock interface. When the fissure angle (90°) is parallel to the loading direction, the normal stress pc becomes a tensile stress, and the main obstacles to the generation of wing cracks are the cementation of the ice–rock interface and the support from the ice.

6 Conclusions
1.
Freezing did not alter the trend of strength variation concerning the inclination angle of the fissures. As the fissure angle increased, both at normal and frozen conditions, the strength exhibited a decreasing-then-increasing trend. The minimum strength was observed at a fissure inclination angle of α = 60°, while the maximum strength was at α = 90°.

2.
At room temperature, the crack initiation mode of the specimens overall showed a changing trend of "tensile cracking → shear cracking → tensile cracking" as the fissure angle increased. In the frozen state, the fractures were filled with ice, and although the overall trend of the crack initiation mode with increasing fissure angle was "tensile cracking → shear cracking → tensile cracking," there were significant differences.

3.
The mechanical properties of frozen fissured sandstone are controlled by both the freezing effect and the fissure angle. The change in fissure angle leads to a change in the stress state around the fissure, while the fissure ice, through ice–rock interaction, further alters the fracture's stress state. The strengthening mechanism of fissure ice includes three aspects: I) under compression, the ice acts as a filling support; II) the ice-filled pores shorten the fracture length, resulting in a reduction of the stress intensity factor at the fracture ends; III) under tensile or shear states, the ice acts as a binder.

4.
At lower fissure angles (0°–30°), the fissure ice is under compression and provides the supporting effect. Besides, ice's infilling effects can mitigate stress concentration at the fissure tips. At larger fissure angles (45°–75°), the cementing effect of the ice–rock interface provides the main resistance to the expansion of shear cracks. When the fissure angle (90°) is parallel to the loading direction, the main obstacles to wing crack formation are the cementing action of the ice–rock interface and the support of the ice.