Abstract
The development of accident tolerant fuel (ATF) cladding has been encouraged to satisfy increased nuclear safety demands under accident conditions since Fukushima accident. Coating techniques using oxidation-resistant materials, such as Cr and Al, on existing Zr-alloy claddings have been widely applied as short-term solutions. However, coating delamination due to poor adhesion may reduce its benefits, such as low waterside corrosion/oxidation rates and fretting resistance, which necessitates accurate evaluation of coating adhesion suitability. In this study, micro-mechanical tests, micro-cantilever bending test and surface and interfacial cutting analysis system test, were conducted to qualitatively and quantitatively evaluate adhesion properties on a coated ATF cladding. In situ scanning electron microscopy-based micro-cantilever bending tests were performed using a pico-indenter equipped with a diamond flat tip. We present the results for magnetron-sputtered Cr-coated ATF claddings in detail. Micro-cantilever tests on the Cr-Zr interface revealed that deformation and failure primarily occurred in the Zr substrate, rather than at the interface. And the Cr-coated cladding showed highly adherent mechanical bonds, as evidenced by the interfacial strength and elastic modulus. SAICAS tests confirmed that peeling of the coating layer occurred only when the applied force exceeded the cutting force of the coating layer. The experimental results suggest that the Cr-coated cladding exhibited a sufficiently adherent mechanical bond to prevent delamination of the coating.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
AdhesionAccident tolerant fuelCoatingMicro-cantileverSAICAS
1. Introduction
Since the Fukushima accident, the development of accident tolerant fuel (ATF) has been encouraged to enhance safety under accident conditions. In this context, coating techniques involving oxidation-resistant materials, such as Cr and Al on existing Zr-alloy claddings have been widely used as a short-term solution. In particular, the Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute (KAERI) has focused on short–term solutions, such as Cr or Cr-Al alloy-coated Zr-alloy cladding, which uses an arc ion plating method [1], [2]. The effectiveness of these coating techniques has been demonstrated using lead test rods and assemblies for Framatome's Cr-coated M5 cladding (PROtect) and Westinghouse's Cr–coated cladding (EnCore®) [3], [4], [5].
A potential limitation when using coated ATF claddings is coating delamination due to poor adhesion, which be attributed to various factors, especially under extreme mechanical, thermal, and radiation conditions. To benefit from adding a coating material (e.g., in terms of oxidation, and mechanical properties), the interface between the Zr-alloy substrate and the coated layer must provide a sufficiently strong and stable bond during normal operation and accident conditions. Otherwise, localized failures may be induced by delamination or cracking. In addition, this may lead to the circulation of the activated debris in the primary coolant. The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission considers coating delamination as a high-ranking damage mechanism and assigns it an appropriate Phenomena Identification and Ranking Table rank, as per the interim staff guidance report [6]. For this reason, coating adhesion properties of coated ATF claddings are crucial. However, few studies have adequately investigated these properties, primarily owing to the limitations in measurement technology. Conventional methods, such as pull-off, peel, scratch, and three-point bending tests have been used to assess coating adhesion [7], [8], [9]. Nevertheless, there is a need to develop a definitive method for small-size tubes, such as those used in ATF cladding.
Recent developments in micro–/nano–mechanical test methods, including micro-cantilever bending, nano-indentation, micro-pillar compression and splitting method, have yielded powerful tools to investigate mechanical properties such as fracture toughness, yield strength and elastic modulus [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17]. Among these, the micro-cantilever technique has been used to investigate interfacial properties and fracture toughness [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17]. This technique can be used to measure the force required to cause delamination or cracking of the coating from the underlying cladding material for the coated ATF cladding. The surface and interfacial cutting analysis system (SAICAS, Daipla Wintes Co., Ltd, Japan) [18], [19] can evaluate the shear stress and cohesive/adhesive strength by measuring the horizontal and vertical forces while controlling the vertical force or cutting/peeling rate using a V-shaped boron nitride or diamond micro-blade. The measured values can be verified by comparing them with the results of the scratch and peel tests. This method is widely used for coated-materials, especially in lithium-ion batteries and the automotive industry [19], [20], [21], [22], [23]. In this regard, this study introduces the micro–cantilever bending test and SAICAS test to qualitatively and quantitatively evaluate the adhesion of coatings on coated ATF cladding. In this paper, a Cr-coated Zr-Nb-Sn alloy ATF cladding created by unbalanced magnetron sputtering was investigated.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Test materials [10]
Magnetron sputtering was used to form a Cr layer on the surface of the Zr-Nb-Sn alloy (Zr-1Nb-0.67Sn-0.1Fe wt%) cladding samples. The uncoated cladding thickness (t) and outer diameter (OD) were 0.57 mm and 9.144 mm, respectively. Before deposition, the Zr-Nb-Sn alloy cladding tubes were cleaned and placed in a vacuum chamber on rotating holders in a Hauzer Flexicoat 850 industrial system. The cladding tubes were cleaned in the chamber via ion etching in argon plasma. This process removed thin Zr-oxide and other impurities, thereby improving the coating adhesion. Pure metallic Cr coatings were then deposited on the outer surfaces of tubular samples from pure Cr (99.8 %) targets in argon at a deposition temperature of 250 °C. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the thickness of the as-deposited coating was 26 ± 2 μm, which was measured using optical microscopy and scanning electron microscopy (SEM).

Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. (a, b) Microstructures of Cr-coated cladding tubes [10].

2.2. Test procedures
2.2.1. Micro-cantilever bending test
Micro-cantilever bending tests were performed to evaluate coating adhesion. For specimen preparation, a Cr-coated cladding tube was cut and the surface of the specimen in the radial-circumferential plane was cross-sectionally milled using an Ar + ion beam in an ion milling machine (Hitachi IM 4000 Plus) [10]. As illustrated in Fig. 2, three single cantilevers with pentagonal cross-sections were fabricated using a cryo-focused ion beam (FIB) (<-170 °C, Thermo-scientific, Aqilos). The shape of the cantilever and the fabrication methods were selected based on a previous study [11]. The size of the micro-cantilever varied slightly for each sample, with an average width of 0.75 µm, thickness of 0.75 µm, and length of 2 µm, as depicted in Fig. 3. The Cr-Zr interface was not placed at the end of the cantilever, which is the weakest part while estimating the adequacy of the coating adhesion to prevent delamination. But to affect sufficiently high stress at the Cr-Zr interface, the ends of the cantilevers were located near the Cr-Zr interface. The average distance between the Cr-Zr interface and the end of the cantilever was 0.16 μm.

Download: Download high-res image (172KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Locations of micro-cantilevers in Cr-coated cladding.


Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Geometry of micro-cantilevers in Cr-coated cladding (a) Schematic and fabricated size of micro-cantilevers, (b) Cantilever 1, (c) Cantilever 2, and (d) Cantilever 3.

Micro–cantilever bending tests with in situ SEM observations were performed using a pico-indenter (Hysitron PI 87) equipped with a 1 μm diamond flat tip. Unlike the indenters with sharp tips, the flat indenter left a negligible impression on the micro-cantilever surface, which helped the load to be fully transferred to the bending force. The Cr-side ends of the cantilevers were uniaxially compressed along the axial direction of the cladding at room temperature, as depicted in Fig. 4. The compression load was applied at a nominal displacement rate of 10 nm/s. The three cantilevers were compressed until failure and to a maximum strain of 400–700 nm, as shown in Fig. 4.

Download: Download high-res image (497KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Photographs of micro-cantilever bending tests for Cr-coated cladding (a) Diamond flat indenter, (b) Indent locations on cantilever and (c) In-situ test.

2.2.2. SAICAS (Surface and interfacial cutting analysis System)
SAICAS [18], [19], [20], [21], [22], [23] is a numerically controlled micro-/nano-cutting machine specially designed for the analysis of forces during the cutting or removal of coatings. SAICAS (model: DN–EX) can measure the adhesion properties while cutting and peeling a coating layer. This system was implemented to quantitatively analyze the adhesion properties of the coating layer on the ATF cladding. A diamond blade was used to cut the film while simultaneously measuring both the horizontal and vertical forces, thereby evaluating the adhesion strength at a specific depth quantitively (Fig. 5 (a)). The width of the cutting edge was 0.5 mm, which was the narrowest among the available options. The rake angle was α = 20°, and the clearance angle was 10°. Because SAICAS held the samples using vacuum, the specimen was cut in half and attached to a glass slide with a strong adhesive, as illustrated in Fig. 5 (b). The tests were performed at vertical and horizontal cutting rates of 0.5 μm/s and 5 μm/s, respectively. The horizontal force measured during the peeling stage was converted to the adhesion force and peel strength at the matrix/coating interface using the following equation, as described in a previous study [19], [22].

Download: Download high-res image (837KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. SAICAS test on Cr-coated cladding (a) Schematic and (b) Mounted specimen on stage.

The adhesion strength (peel strength, P) of the Cr coating layer was calculated by measuring the average horizontal force (Fh,peel, in N) while peeling at a constant rate and then dividing it by the width of the blade (w, in mm) using Equation (1). The shear stress (τ, in MPa), which reflects the adhesion cohesion strength within the Cr coating layer, was calculated from the horizontal force (Fh,cut, in N) exerted while cutting, the width of the blade (w, in mm), and the thickness of Cr coating layer (d, in mm) using Equation (2).
(1)
(2)
3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Micro-cantilever bending test
The applied bending load (Pb, in N) and corresponding displacement (u, depth) responses of the cantilevers are depicted in Fig. 6 (a). All cantilevers exhibited linear load-depth behaviors during the initial stage, followed by yielding and plastic flow, similar to the tensile stress–strain behavior of ductile materials. Cantilever 1 suffered a ductile fracture with tearing at a deformation depth of approximately 1,100 nm. Cantilevers 2 and 3 were deformed with ductile behavior up to depths of 700 and 400 nm, respectively. The stiffness (k) of the cantilevers in the elastic region, i.e., the slope of the load–displacement curve, varied in the range of 3.21–3.33 μN/nm. The elastic modulus (E, Young’s modulus) values were evaluated based on the linear-elastic Euler-Bernoulli beam theory using the measured stiffness values and Equations (3), (4), (5) [11], [12], [13], [24], [25]:
(3)
(4)
(5)

Download: Download high-res image (360KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Results of cantilever bending test for Cr-coated cladding (a) Load-displacement (depth) curve and (b) Pre/post-test SEM images of micro-cantilever.

where y denotes the vertical distance between the upper surface and the neutral plane, I denotes the moment of inertia of the beam cross-section; and b, w, and L denote the thickness, width and bending length of the micro-cantilever, respectively.
The elastic modulus values observed in micro-cantilever tests ranged from 185.0 to 203.1 GPa. These values were between the elastic moduli of Cr (234.7 GPa) and Zr (95.5 GPa), as measured in a previous study [10]. Because stiffness represents the capability to resist deflection, under an applied load, a decrease in the aspect ratio (bending length/thickness) is expected to result in higher beam stiffness and corresponding elastic modulus. Konstantiniuk et al. [25] reported that an aspect ratio exceeding six should be used to determine elastic modulus values accurately using the Euler-Bernoulli equation. The elastic modulus of SiO2 measured using a micro-cantilever with an aspect ratio of 3.8 was 30 % lower than the actual value. However, the aspect ratios of the cantilevers used in this study were < 2. Thus, the elastic modulus values (185.0–203.1 GPa) were overestimated, and thus, the actual values were closer to the elastic modulus of Zr than that of Cr. Based on these observations, we conclude that the actual deformation occurred primarily in the Zr substrate region and not in the Cr layer. The bending stress σ at the top surface of the beam can also be calculated based on the obtained load–displacement data assuming an ideal pentagonal cross-section, a rigidly clamped beam and small displacements, using the following equation [11], [12], [13].
(6)
The results of the micro-cantilever bending of the Cr-coated cladding are summarized in Table 1. The yield and maximum stress values for each cantilever range were 6,214–7,261 MPa and 7,070–8,017 MPa, respectively. The Cr-Zr interfaces sustained stress levels exceeding 6,200 MPa without plastic deformation. These strength in micro-mechanics must consider the size effect, but it cannot be directly applied to the interface due to the different size effect of Zr and Cr [10]. Nevertheless, the interfacial strength is more than three times higher than the strength of Zr and Cr in the micro-pillar test experiment [10]. Considering the high interfacial strength of the Cr-Zr micro-cantilevers and elastic modulus values close to that of Zr, we concluded that the Cr-coated cladding exhibited a sufficiently adherent mechanical bond to prevent coating delamination.
Table 1. Results of micro-cantilever bending tests on Cr-coated cladding.

Empty Cell	Aspect ratio	Stiffness (μN/nm)	Young’s modulus (GPa)	Yield stress (MPa)	Maximum stress (MPa)
Cantilever 1	1.85	3.33	198.9	7,261	8,017
Cantilever 2	1.86	3.21	185.0	6,456	7,206
Cantilever 3	1.93	3.29	203.1	6,214	7,070
Fig. 6 (b) shows the pre- and post-test SEM images of each cantilever, with the white dotted line in the figures representing the Cr-Zr boundary and the end of the cantilever. The Cr layer on the left side of the SEM image appears to have undergone very limited deformation. It is important to note that no delamination of the coating layer occurred until the cantilever failed. In addition, only the Zr region, indicated by the white arrow, was extended by deformation. Thus, the results suggest that the deformation and failure of the cantilevers occur mainly at the Zr substrate and not at the interface or Cr layer.
3.2. SAICAS
Two types of SAICAS tests were performed, one to measure the adhesion strength of the coating (peel strength, Fig. 7 (a)) and another to measure the properties of the coating itself (Fig. 7 (b)). Fig. 8 illustrates the horizontal (Fh) and vertical (Fv) forces and the cutting depth as a function of time during the SAICAS measurements. During the first shear strength measurement stage, the diamond blade moved horizontally and vertically to cut the Cr coating layer with increased horizontal (Fh) and vertical (Fv) forces. During the following stage, the diamond blade moved almost horizontally along the Cr-Zr interface (Fig. 7 (a)) or the Cr coating layer (Fig. 7 (b)).

Download: Download high-res image (69KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Schematic of SAICAS test for Cr-coated cladding (a) Cr-Zr interface cut and (b) Coating layer cut.


Download: Download high-res image (307KB)
Download: Download full-size image

Download: Download high-res image (228KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Results of SAICAS test for Cr-coated cladding (a) Cr-Zr interface cut, (b) Coating layer cut, and (c) Photograph captured using charge-coupled device cameras during peeling.

SAICAS successfully peeled off the Cr coating layer and detected the Cr-Zr interface at a specific depth, as illustrated in Fig. 7 (a) (marked in the yellow region) and Fig. 7 (c), respectively. The average horizontal force at the Cr-Zr interface during peeling was 11.454 N, and the adhesion strength (peel strength) and shear strength obtained using Equation (1), (2), respectively, were 22.909 kN/m and 440.5 MPa. The horizontal force while cutting the Cr layer in a constant-depth region (referred to as single-axis motion) was 10.127 N, which was lower than that at the Cr-Zr interface during peeling (11.454 N). These results suggest that the Cr layer failed before coating delamination when a force was applied parallel to the coating interface. Thus, the Cr-coated cladding exhibited a sufficiently adherent mechanical bond to prevent the delamination of coating. The results of the SAICAS test are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2. Results of SAICAS tests on Cr-coated cladding.

Empty Cell	Adhesion strength (kN/m)	Horizontal force cutting in constant depth (Fh, N)	Shear strength of Cr coating layer (MPa)
Cr-Zr interface
(Average value of Trial 1 and 2)	22.909	11.454	440.5
In Cr coating layer	−	10.127
4. Conclusions
In this study, micro-mechanical tests were performed on magnetron-sputtered Cr-coated Zr-Nb-Sn alloy cladding to evaluate the adhesion properties of the coating layers of ATF claddings. Micro-cantilever tests on the Cr-Zr interface revealed that the deformation and failure of cantilevers occurred mainly at the Zr substrate and not at the interface or the Cr layer. In addition, the Cr-coated cladding exhibited sufficiently adherent mechanical bonding, considering its high interfacial strength and elastic modulus values close to those of Zr. SAICAS tests confirmed that peeling of the coating layer occurred only when the applied force exceeded the cutting force of the coating layer. Based on this analysis, we can conclude that the magnetron-sputtered Cr-coated cladding exhibits a sufficiently adherent mechanical bond to prevent coating delamination.