Abstract
In the wind shear icing environment, the periodically varying inflow conditions experienced by wind turbine blades can significantly enhance the dynamic icing characteristics, which poses a great challenge to wind turbine icing research. To investigate this phenomenon, the Improved Multi-Shot Icing Computational Model (IMSICM) is utilized. In IMSICM, an efficient dynamic icing computational frame is designed by using the 3D Free Wake Lifting Line method coupled with the 2D Viscous and Inviscid Interaction method to calculate the flow field. Meanwhile, the Lagrangian method is applied to compute the water droplet impingement information and the Messinger Model is used to simulate the ice growth. After validation of IMSICM by the icing wind tunnel experimental results, the wind shear icing processes of the NREL 5 MW wind turbine under different wind shear conditions are analyzed. The results show that different from the linear growth behavior of Rime ice, the nonlinear features of Glaze ice development are significant. The wind shear effect has a greater impact on the Glaze ice shape, mainly manifested as the ice protrusions behind the main ice horn are suppressed. This phenomenon is mainly due to the combined effect of water impingement shadowing and heat transfer reduction.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Horizontal axis wind turbineIce accretionWind shear effectIcing numerical simulationIcing wind tunnel experiment
Nomenclature
Symbol
Description
AoA
Angle of Attack
Surface Area
Droplet cross-sectional area
Drag Coefficient of Airfoil
Lift Coefficient of Airfoil
Drag Coefficient of Water Droplet
Frictional Coefficient
Shape Factor
Vortex Core Parameter
Liquid Water Content
Lewis number
Median Volume Diameter
Energy source caused by convection heat transfer
Energy source caused by evaporation
Energy source from the previous element
Energy source caused by impingement
Energy source caused by the outflow of liquid water
Energy source caused by water solidification
Reynolds Number
Relative Reynolds Number of Droplet
Temperature
Vector of Wind Velocity
Impingement distance under curve coordinate system
Initial released distance
Greek symbol Description
Vorticity Intensity
Rotation Speed of Wind Turbine
Stream Function
Local Airfoil Angle of Attack
Collection Efficiency
Displacement Thickness
Wind Shear Coefficient
Twist Angle
Circumferential Angle
Symbol Description
Scalar of Wind Velocity
Induced Wind Velocity
Relative Inflow Wind Speed
Chord Length
Magnitude of vector
Convective heat transfer coefficient
Height of ice
Mass source reduction caused by water evaporation
Mass source from the previous element
Mass source from impingement of water droplets
Mass source reduction caused by the outflow of liquid water
Mass source reduction caused by water solidification
Empirical Coefficient
Pressure
Radial Position of Local Vortex Line
Position Vector at One End of the Vortex Segment
Position Vector at the Other End of the Vortex Segment
Unsteady Radius of Vortex
Vector of the water droplet
Effective Radius of Local Vortex Line
Time
Velocity at Edge of Boundary Layer
Air density
Droplet density
Ice density
Superscript
Description
the 
 th Element
Subscript
Description
Relative
Wind Turbine Hub
Induced
Saturated state
Solid
Infinite
1. Introduction
With the fast development of the wind energy industry, wind resources in cold climate regions have gained much more attention in recent years [1]. However, the icing problem poses a great challenge to the development of wind energy. The ice accretion on the wind turbine blade may significantly alter its geometric shape and greatly reduce the aerodynamic performance [2]. It has been reported that the losses of wind turbine Annual Energy Production (AEP) caused by icing issues can reach up to 17 % [3]. According to the statistics of Goldwind Co., Ltd of China, there are more than 9667 wind turbines that have experienced icing events leading to a power generation loss of 7.5 × 107 kWh only in the wind farm of Goldwind Co. in 2016. Besides, the accreted ice can also change the weight distribution of wind turbine blades leading to different aero-elastic responses or even the damage of the blade [4].
Generally, wind turbine icing types can be mainly divided into in-cloud icing and precipitation icing. In-cloud icing occurs when the super-cooled water droplets involved in the cloud freeze on the surface of the wind turbine, while precipitation icing usually relates to the ice accretion caused by freezing rain, drizzle, wet snow, etc. [5].
To investigate the in-cloud icing phenomenon of wind turbines, different scholars have conducted extensive research work. Shu et al. carried out ice shape observation on a 300 kW wind turbine in a nature icing environment and found out that the ice thickness on the blade has a rapid increase from the root to the middle of the blade, while the increasing tendency slows down from the middle to the blade tip [6]. Hochart et al. analyzed the ice accretion on a 1.8 MW–Vestas V80 wind turbine by icing wind tunnel experiment based on a 0.2m NACA 63–415 blade profile. Their experimental results show that under glaze icing conditions, due to the movement of water film, a significantly larger ice-covered region has been found on the outer half of the blade [7]. In addition, Jin et al. studied the ice shape features of DU96 [8] and S826 & S832 airfoils [9] based on the icing wind tunnel of Cranfield University, in which the dynamic icing process was detailed recorded, and a certain kind of feather-like ice spikes were observed.
However, currently, most of the wind turbine icing research focuses on uniform inflow conditions. The wind shear effect is usually not considered. The wind shear effect is an essential feature of wind turbines because they operate in the Atmospheric Boundary Layer (ABL) where the inflow is highly susceptible to the influence of local terrain [10]. To describe the wind profile under wind shear conditions, Hellman proposed a simple yet effective Power Law model, that assumes the wind speed varies exponentially with height. The corresponding exponential index is usually called the Wind Shear Coefficient (WSC) [11]. Different from the icing process with uniform inflow, wind shear icing can significantly enhance the dynamic icing process. From the perspective of the local airfoil of a wind turbine blade, the inflow speed and Angle of Attack (AoA) are dynamically changing within a rotation cycle, which can not only lead to the transient flow field and water droplets impingement but also results in unsteady heat transfer involved in the phase transition process.
The wind shear icing phenomenon provides a great challenge for studying the ice accretion of wind turbine blades. Firstly, it cannot be accurately simulated by icing wind tunnel experiments. At present, most of the large industrial icing wind tunnels are not equipped with a ground effect simulation device, including the Icing Research Tunnel (IRT) at NASA Glenn Research Center [12], the Icing Wind Tunnel of CIRA [13], and the Icing Wind Tunnel of China Aerodynamics Research and Development Center (CARDC) [14], etc. Meanwhile, the large sub-scale of wind turbine blades in icing wind tunnel experiments will inevitably bring experimental errors. Secondly, there is a lack of effective numerical simulation methods for studying wind shear icing problems. Although a dynamic icing numerical simulation model has been proposed by Narducci et al. in dealing with helicopter icing issues [15,16], Fouladi demonstrates that Narducci's model is strongly dependent on the initial AoA, which is inconsistent with physical reality. To solve this problem, Fouladi developed a quasi-unsteady numerical simulation method based on the FENSAP-ICE software, in which the unsteady flow and water droplet equations are decoupled from the icing computation [17]. However, since the Finite Element Method is used in calculating the 3D flow field, analyzing wind shear icing of wind turbines by Fouladi's model may consume significant computational time and resources.
To the best of the authors' knowledge, there is limited research on wind turbine icing phenomenon under wind shear conditions. To fill the gap, an efficient unsteady icing simulation method, named Improved Multi-Shot Icing Computational Model (IMSICM), has been applied [18], in which the flow field is calculated by the Free Wake Lifting Line Method [19], the water droplets impingement is computed by Lagrangian method [20], and the ice growth is simulated by Messinger Model [21]. In IMSICM, the flow field, water collection, and ice growth computational modules are efficiently coupled according to the different time scales involved in the dynamic icing process, which provides a suitable computational tool for studying the complex icing mechanism of wind turbine under wind shear conditions.
In this paper, the IMSICM is further modified by adding a 2D Viscous and Inviscid Interaction solver to accelerate the icing calculation. In addition, some improved computational techniques for computing liquid water droplet impingement and ice growth have been also included. The paper is organized as follows. In the second part, the mathematic models and the corresponding improvement of IMSICM will be introduced. Then based on the icing wind tunnel experimental results of CARDC and NASA IRT, the IMSICM is fully validated. Part four describes the wind shear icing analysis of the NREL 5 MW wind turbine. Finally, the conclusion will be given.
2. Numerical methodology
The computational frame of IMSICM is illustrated in Fig. 1. The main advantage of IMSICM is that the different time scales involved in the dynamic icing are considered. In IMSICM, the total icing time is firstly divided into a series of shots, by assuming that in each shot the 3D flow field is frozen. At each end of the shot, the 3D flow field is updated based on the Free Wake Lifting Line Method (FWLLM), which is fast and efficient in obtaining the 3D flow field information. Based on the characteristics of FWLLM, the 3D flow field can be represented by a group of 2D airfoil cases along the blade span. Thus the following dynamic ice growth can be computed in the 2D airfoil frame.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (710KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Computational flow chart of IMSICM.

The 2D airfoil unsteady icing can be further divided into sub-shots. Each sub-shot contains two stages. In Stage I, the ice shape during one rotation cycle of the wind turbine blade is simulated by the traditional multistep icing computational method [22]. Then, the dynamic ice shape feature is transferred into Stage II and a linear growth of ice height distribution is assumed by considering that the accretion ice in one rotating cycle is usually so thin that it will not affect the icing rate significantly. Therefore, in Stage II, the ice is accreted for several rotation cycles until the criteria of the sub-shot is triggered. The IMSICM method is highly efficient and suitable for the dynamic icing simulation of rotating wind turbines. In the following content, the main computational methods used in IMSICM will be introduced.
2.1. Flow field computational method
The Free Wake Lifting Line Method (FWLLM) is utilized to compute the 3D flow field in IMSICM. The FWLLM is a kind of vortex method widely used in the evaluation of wind turbine aerodynamic performance [23]. In FWLLM, the wind turbine blade is modeled by a bound vortex, which is located on the quarter chord of the blade. According to the Kutta-Joukowski theorem, a relationship between blade-bound vortex strength and inflow condition can be established as shown in Eqns. (1), (2), (3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
where 
 and 
 are the relative inflow speed and lift coefficient of the ith vortex segment. However, Eqns. (1), (2), (3) are not closed, because 
 is not only depend on the bound vortexes of the blade but also influenced by the free wake vortex segments, which is generated by the vorticity variation of the bound vortex along the span of the blade. Besides, the change of the bound vorticity over time will also result in the shedding vortex that contributes to 
. By applying the Helmholtz vorticity conservation law, all the wake vorticity can be determined once the spatial and temporal variations of the bound vortex are known. Then, 
 can be evaluated by Eqs. (4), (5)
(4)
(5)
where 
 is used to simulate the vortex core [24] and 
 is the empirical coefficient. In this paper 
 is taken. 
 is defined as the effective radius, which is modeled by Ramasamy and Leishman method [25,26]. Eqns. (1), (2), (3), (4), (5) are nonlinear and can be solved by iterative computation. The detailed information can be found in Ref. [18].
The main advantage of FWLLM is that it can convert the 3D flow field into a series of 2D local airfoil flow fields along the span of the blade. Thus, the following icing analysis can be carried out based on 2D conditions, which avoids the time-consuming 3D computation. In the previous version of IMSICM, a 2D Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) module was involved in calculating the local 2D icing process. To further improve the computational efficiency of IMSICM, the Viscous and Inviscid Interaction (VII) method, as proposed by Drela et al. [27], is applied in this paper.
In VII, the inviscid flow field is computed by the classical Panel Method, in which the airfoil is represented by a vortex sheet of strength 
 and a source sheet of strength 
. The stream function at any point in the domain can be written as
(6)
where 
 and 
 are the magnitude and angle of the vector pointing from the control point of the local panel and the field point (x, y). 
 is the inflow AoA. Because the stream function at each node on the airfoil equals some constant value 
, a group of equations can be established by considering this condition at each node of all panels. However, there are two unknowns in Eq. (6), and it is still needed to find supplementary conditions. According to the potential flow theory, the source sheet has a close relationship with the viscous effect of the boundary layer. Thus, it is straightforward to calculate 
 by boundary layer computational method. In the current model, the compressible integral boundary layer equations are considered, which can be written as
(7)
(8)
Generally, the source strength 
 is equal to the local gradient of mass defect. Thus, the following equation holds.
(9)
By coupling (6)–(9), a closed system of equations can be calculated and the distribution of singularities (
 and 
) of the local airfoil can be obtained. Once the flow field is known, the water droplet impingement characteristics can be computed, which will be introduced in the following.
2.2. Water collection computational method
The Lagrangian method is applied in the water collection computation, in which the trajectories of water droplets are tracked and the liquid water collection efficiency can be computed by the ratio of the initial released area to the impingement surface area, as shown in Fig. 2. The water collection coefficient is defined in Eqn. (10).
(10)
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (198KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Definition of the water collection efficiency.

Based on the rigid ball assumption, the movement of the water droplet can be written as
(11)
where 
 is the drag coefficient of the water droplet. In this paper, the drag coefficient model proposed in Ref. [28] is utilized, as shown in the following
(12)
(13)
In Eqn. (11), 
 is the velocity vector in the flow field, which can be computed by considering the influence of the obtained singularities from VII computation, which can be written as
(14)
where 
 is calculated by Eqn. (6).
Generally, the computational efficiency of the Lagrangian method dramatically depends on the complexity of tracking water droplets. Compared with the CFD computation, the VII method is a kind of meshless method, that is more flexible and efficient in finding water droplet collection coefficient.
2.3. Ice accretion computational method
The classic Messinger method is adopted in IMSICM to simulate the ice growth process, in which the basic mass and energy conversation is considered, as illustrated in Fig. 3. The corresponding equations are shown in Eqn. (15) and Eqn. (16).
(15)
(16)
in which the 
 and the 
 can be computed by the following equations
(17)
(18)
where 
 is Lewis number, which is computed by the method proposed by Kays & Crawford [29], 
 is the convection heat transfer coefficient which is calculated by the boundary layer integral method. For more information, the reader can refer to Ref. [30]. Eqn. (15) and Eqn. (16) are solved iteratively because temperature as well as the ice phase change is not known. Once the results are converged, the ice height can be calculated by the obtained 
 as shown in the following
(19)
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (355KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Schematic diagram of the mass and energy conservation in the Messinger model [18].

The ice growth direction is another issue that affects the ice shape result. In general, the ice growth is assumed to be normal to the local wall element. In most of the cases, the normal directions of neighbor elements are different. To keep the consistency of ice growth, the averaged normal direction vector of two neighbor computational elements is used as the ice growing direction. However, this ice-growing manner can result in non-conservation of the freezing water. To avoid this issue, a multi-layer ice growing strategy is applied as shown in Fig. 4, in which the ice accretion is further divided into several layers and the ice growing direction is modified accordingly.
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (174KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Schematic diagram of the ice growth in the Messinger model.

3. Model validation
To validate the accuracy of IMSICM, an icing wind tunnel experiment of the NACA0012 airfoil section is carried out in the Icing Wind Tunnel (IWT) of CARDC. The IWT of CARDC is a closed-circuit wind tunnel with three replaceable test sections: the main test section (3m × 2m × 6.5m), the secondary test section (4.8m × 3.2m × 9m), and the high-speed test section (2m × 1.5m × 4.5m). The maximum wind speeds in the main and the high-speed test sections can reach up to 210 m/s and 256 m/s respectively. A powerful refrigerating system is equipped with IWT with a power of 11160 kW, which can cool the air to −40 °C. To simulate the cloudy environment, a special spray system, composed of 1000 nozzles is installed in front of the test section. The Liquid Water Content (LWC) from 0.2 g/m3 to 3 g/m3 and Median Volume Diameter (MVD) from 10 μm to 300 μm can be simulated by this system. The calibration experimental results demonstrate that the icing simulation capability of IWT of CARDC can meet the requirement of the recommended practices described in the SAE-ARP 5905 “Calibration and Acceptance of Icing Wind Tunnels” [31].
The main test section is utilized in the validation experiment. The testing model is the two-dimensional straight airfoil section which is manufactured by aviation aluminum material based on NACA0012 airfoil. The chord length of the model is 0.457m and its height is 2m. The model is installed at the center of the test section and the AoA can be controlled by the turntable of the wind tunnel. Fig. 5 shows the layout of the IWT and the model installed in the main test section.
Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (600KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. The layout of the Icing Wind Tunnel of CARDC (left) and the photo of the NACA0012 model installed in the main test section (right).

Testing conditions are selected as shown in Table 1. A typical Rime ice (Case I) and Glaze ice (Case II) are selected. The corresponding freezing fraction (
) at the stagnation point of Case I and Case II are 1.0 and 0.15 respectively. The 
 is defined as the ratio of the frozen water mass to the whole collected water at the stagnation point of the model, which represents the degree of freezing.
Table 1. Icing wind tunnel experimental conditions carried out in IWT and the scaling results of IRISM.

Case Name	Chord Length (m)	Wind Speed (m/s)	AoA (deg)	T (oC)	MVD (μm)	LWC (g/m3)	Time (min)	n0 (−)
Case I	0.457	67.1	3.0	−23	20	0.5	25	1.0
Case II	0.457	109.2	3.0	−7.9	22	1.19	5.2	0.15
Fig. 6 illustrates the experimental ice shape photos of Case I and Case II. For Case I, the temperature and LWC are relatively lower, the water droplets would freeze immediately upon the leading edge of the model, forming white and smooth Rime ice. From the detailed side view of the ice accretion, it can be found that the limiting edge of the ice is formed by different scales of ice feathers. This is probably due to the impingement of the water droplets flying around the leading edge of the ice accretion. Because of the perturbation of local flow and ice geometric feathers, the ice boundaries vary along the span direction. For Case II, the ice is formed under the condition of relatively warmer temperature and higher LWC. The incoming flow cannot take away all the released heat of water droplets, thus the remaining impacted water mass will run back along the surface and be frozen into ice gradually. The ice has a typical Glaze ice horn with complex and transparent small ice structures on it. Besides, it can be also seen a significantly lower ice valley region along the span of the model. This is mainly because, near the airflow stagnation position, the kinetic energy of the airflow will be converted into internal energy and local static temperature is approximately equal to the total temperature. Therefore, the impinged water is more difficult to freeze, which will result in a smaller ice accretion thickness.
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (704KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. The icing wind tunnel test results of Case I and Case II.

Fig. 7 shows the ice shape comparison between the experimental data and the computational results of IMSICM. It can be seen that for both the Rime ice (Case I) and Glaze ice (Case II) conditions, the ice shapes predicted by IMSICM are highly consistent with the experimental data. However, it should be noticed that there are minor differences between the simulation and experimental ice shapes, e.g. the ice horn details and limiting positions of ice accumulation, etc. This is mainly because, on one hand, with the change of ice boundary the flow field is becoming more complex, and that is difficult to be accurately simulated by the potential flow method used in IMSICM, especially when the flow separation is significant. On the other hand, in the Messinger model, it is assumed that all the unfrozen liquid water in the current element will flow into the next computational element. This oversimplified liquid film assumption can lead to computational errors.
Fig. 7
Download: Download high-res image (378KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. The icing test results and the comparison of ice shapes of Case I and Case II.

To explain the deviation of the Messinger model and the complex icing phenomenon, the transient variation of the water film in the initial ice accretion is illustrated in Fig. 8. When the spray starts 2 s, the leading edge of the model is covered by micro ice rough elements. Then at 8 s, there exists an obvious continuous water film flowing on the surface of the model towards the trailing edge direction, which presents a 2D formation. However, when icing time reaches 16 s, the 2D continuous water film begins to appear with 3D features at the front edge and finally, at 26 s, it achieves a significant 3D form. Hereafter, the ice continuously grows under the influence of the 3D water film and rough ice elements. Generally, these complex dynamic processes of water film can be hardly simulated by the Messinger model used in IMSICM. More advanced icing simulation models are still needed to be developed in the future.
Fig. 8
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. The development of water film and the corresponding ice shape during ice accretion.

To further validate the IMSICM, the icing wind tunnel experimental results of IRT are also considered and the ice shapes between the numerical and experimental results are compared. Table 2 shows the icing wind tunnel conditions and Fig. 9 illustrates the corresponding ice shape comparison.
Table 2. Icing wind tunnel experimental conditions carried out in IRT of NASA.

Case Name	Chord Length (m)	Wind Speed (m/s)	AoA (deg)	T (oC)	MVD (μm)	LWC (g/m3)	Time (min)
Case IRT-1	0.5334	67.1	3.5	−4.67	20	1.0	6.0
Case IRT-2	0.5334	67.1	3.5	−13.65	20	1.0	6.0
Case IRT-3	0.5334	67.1	3.5	−28.65	20	1.0	6.0
Case IRT-4	0.5334	102.8	3.5	−7.79	20	0.55	7.0
Case IRT-5	0.5334	102.8	3.5	−22.79	20	0.55	7.0
Case IRT-6	0.5334	102.8	3.5	−16.84	30	0.47	8.2
Fig. 9
Download: Download high-res image (595KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. The icing test results and the comparison of ice shapes of Case I and Case II.

We can see that the ice shapes predicted by IMSICM agree well with the experimental results under different icing conditions, which demonstrates that the IMSICM can be used as a useful tool in analyzing wind turbine icing problems.
4. Analysis of NREL 5 MW wind turbine icing under wind shear condition
4.1. Definition of wind shear conditions
In this section, the NREL 5 MW wind turbine is used to analyze the wind turbine icing phenomenon under wind shear conditions. The NREL 5 MW wind turbine, developed by Jonkman et al. is a three-bladed upwind variable-speed wind turbine with a rotor diameter of 126m and a hub height of 90m. The wind turbine blade is mainly designed by DU40, DU35, DU25, DU21, and NACA64816 airfoils from the blade root to the tip. The rated wind speed and rotational speed are 11.4 m/s and 12.1 rpm respectively [32].
The wind shear condition of the atmospheric boundary layer is defined by the power law method (also referred to as the Hellman exponential law model) as shown in the following formula
(20)
where 
 is the Wind Shear Coefficient (WSC). In general, the WSC is an engineering empirical value to express the influence of the ground effect. According to the American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE 7–05), the WSC of urban and suburban areas is 1/4, while that of flat, unobstructed areas and water surfaces is 1/9 [33]. However, based on wind resource LiDAR measurement in an industrial area near Lake Erie of Ohio, USA, Li, etc. demonstrates that the WSC can be dramatically larger than the ASCE suggested values in a certain period [34].
In the following analysis, the WSC from 0 to 0.4 will be involved in the icing computation. The icing conditions are mainly divided into three groups according to the icing temperature. The LWC is assumed to be 0.36 g/m3 which represents a kind of extreme icing condition as proposed by Lamraoui et al. [35]. The inflow speed is set as 11.4 m/s and the wind turbine is operating at the rated rotational speed 12.1 rpm. A total icing time of 3600s is considered. The detailed icing conditions are listed in Table 3.
Table 3. Icing conditions of NREL 5 MW wind turbine.

Case Name	Wind Speed (m/s)	T (oC)	MVD (μm)	LWC (g/m3)	Time (sec)	WSC (−)
Case 1-1	11.4	−30.0	40	0.36	3600	0
Case 1-2	11.4	−30.0	40	0.36	3600	0.1
Case 1-3	11.4	−30.0	40	0.36	3600	0.2
Case 1-4	11.4	−30.0	40	0.36	3600	0.3
Case 1-5	11.4	−30.0	40	0.36	3600	0.4
Case 2-1	11.4	−15.0	40	0.36	3600	0
Case 2-2	11.4	−15.0	40	0.36	3600	0.1
Case 2-3	11.4	−15.0	40	0.36	3600	0.2
Case 2-4	11.4	−15.0	40	0.36	3600	0.3
Case 2-5	11.4	−15.0	40	0.36	3600	0.4
Case 3-1	11.4	−5.0	40	0.36	3600	0
Case 3-2	11.4	−5.0	40	0.36	3600	0.1
Case 3-3	11.4	−5.0	40	0.36	3600	0.2
Case 3-4	11.4	−5.0	40	0.36	3600	0.3
Case 3-5	11.4	−5.0	40	0.36	3600	0.4
4.2. Results and discussion
4.2.1. The ice shape simulation results at −30.0 °C
The transient ice shape development under different wind shear icing environments at −30 °C is illustrated in Fig. 10. It can be seen that the ice is mainly accreted on the leading edge of the local airfoil with a smooth appearance. When the span position moves from 57.7 % to 97.8 %, the ice accumulation has increased significantly, because the augmented inflow speed brings more liquid water mass that can be frozen on the surface of the blade.
Fig. 10
Download: Download high-res image (732KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 10. Transient ice shape comparison among different WSC conditions of Case 1.

By comparing the ice shapes of different WSCs, it can be found that the wind shear effect does not dramatically affect the overall development of the ice shapes. At relatively lower temperatures, the water droplets are frozen immediately when hitting the blade. Therefore, the ice shape is mainly influenced by the local inflow condition and the water droplet collection characteristics. The computational results demonstrate that if only the flow field and water impingement are considered, the wind shear effect has little impact on the icing of wind turbine blades.
However, from the detailed observation of the ice structure, we can see that under larger WSC conditions, the trend of forming small ice protrusions (marked by red circles in Fig. 10) downstream of the main ice horn is more obvious, especially in the region far away from the tip of the blade.
To find out the reason, the Water Collection Coefficients (
) at 55.7 % and 97.8 % span positions are illustrated in Fig. 11, in which the 
 curves of WSC = 0.0 and WSC = 0.4 are compared. 
 is defined as the circumference angle of the wind turbine blade. 
 and 
 correspond to the upward and downward states of the blade, respectively. At 97.8 % span position, the influence of the wind shear effect on water collection is very limited for both clear and icing blades. The main difference is in the stagnation region, the 
 value of the icing blade is a little higher and the range of the water impingement concentration region narrows. This is mainly caused by the reduction of the curvature radius of the local icing boundary with the growth of the ice horn.
Fig. 11
Download: Download high-res image (636KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 11. Water collection coefficient comparison under different WSC conditions at 57.7 % and 97.8 % span positions.

However, for the 57.7 % span position, the wind shear effect plays a more important role in determining the water collection coefficients. For clear blades, the wind shear effect leads to more significant differences in the impact range of the liquid water. As shown in Fig. 11, the impinged range of water droplets under WSC = 0.0 condition is (−0.096, 0.01), while those values of 
 and 
 under WSC = 0.4 condition are (−0.085, 0.019) and (−0.1, 0.002), respectively. Compared with the WSC = 0.0 condition, the water droplets' upper impingement limit is enlarged from 0.01 to 0.019 within one revolution of the blade when WSC = 0.4. The significantly expanded upper limit is one of the factors leading to the growth of the ice protrusions. In addition, once a small protrusion is formed, it can be quickly stimulated by the aggregation of liquid water collection, which can be seen in the 
 curve of the icing blade of WSC = 0.4 in Fig. 11.
4.2.2. The ice shape simulation results at −15.0 °C
Ice shape development at a −15 °C icing environment is shown in Fig. 12. With the increase in temperature, the ice shape exhibits typical multi-ice-horn shapes. Compared with the Rime ice shapes in Fig. 10, the significant nonlinear evolution of the ice shapes can be seen at all the blade positions. This is mainly because, at −15 °C temperature, the liquid water cannot freeze immediately when hitting the blade. Instead, it will form a thin liquid water film flowing on the surface driven by the airflow and gradually freezes during the movement. As a result, the ice shape is not only determined by the local flow field and the water collection but also influenced by the dynamic transportation process of the liquid film, which may include dramatical nonlinearity.
Fig. 12
Download: Download high-res image (805KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 12. Transient ice shape comparison among different WSC conditions of Case 2.

The wind shear effect affects the final ice shape significantly. But different from the Rime ice condition, the larger the WSC, the more suppressed the ice horn of the suction side of the local airfoil. By comparing the ice shapes of different WSC at the same span position, it can be seen that when WSC increases from 0.0 to 0.4, the height of the uppermost ice horn is reduced. Fig. 13 shows the comparison of the inflow speed, the AoA, and the ice shapes at different icing times between WSC = 0.0 and WSC = 0.4 cases at 97.8 % span positions. It can be found that although both the inflow speed and AoA are periodically varied, the fluctuation of the inflow speed is relatively small. The change of the AoA is the main factor. In addition, by comparing the ice shapes at 540s, 1080s, 1620s, and 3600s, it can be seen that the uppermost ice horn is not stimulated under the icing environment of WSC = 0.4.
Fig. 13
Download: Download high-res image (431KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 13. The AoA and the ice shapes at different icing times between WSC = 0.0 and WSC = 0.4 cases at 97.8 % span positions.

To explain this phenomenon, the water collection and the convective heat transfer coefficients of WSC = 0.0 and 0.4 at 97.8 % span position during the dynamic growing of ice are compared, as shown in Fig. 14. In the figure, the averaged data under wind shear icing condition is the average result of one rotation of the blade. At the initial stage of icing (icing time = 0s), the water collection and the convective heat transfer coefficients are very close for both WSC = 0.0 and 0.4 conditions. The only difference is that the peak value of the convective heat transfer coefficient around the stagnation point (wrap coodinate = 0) slightly decreases, while the valley value slightly increases.
Fig. 14
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 14. The comparison of the water collection coefficient and Htc of Case 2.

However, with the increase of time, the water collection and the convective heat transfer coefficients under wind shear environments have undergone significant changes. When the icing time equals 540s, the water collection coefficient of WSC = 0.4 is reduced on the suction side of the blade (wrap coordinate>0), which has a close relationship with the shadowing effect of the local ice protrusion. At the same time, the convective heat transfer coefficient here also decreases. By contrast, the peak value of the convective heat transfer coefficient of WSC = 0.0 further increases and the valley value decreases.
When the icing time continues to increase to 1080s, influenced by the enhanced water collection and convective heat transfer, the third ice horn of WSC = 0.0 icing condition starts to show an increasing trend. From the water coefficient results it can be seen that due to ice protrusion, the water collection near the ice protrusion position is not significantly influenced by the shadowing effect of the main ice horn. However, the water collection coefficient of WSC = 0.4 is reduced to a lower level. This effect is more obvious when icing time reaches 1620s.
To summarize, the reason why the wind shear effect suppresses the development of the uppermost ice horn at glazing conditions is that in a wind shear icing environment, the peak position of the convective heat transfer is moving during the motion of the blade, thus the ice protrusion can not be formed at a fixed position. This is different from the Rime ice condition, in which the ice shape is not influenced by the convective heat transfer anymore. For the WSC = 0.0 icing condition, once there is an ice protrusion formed on the suction side, the water collection and convective heat transfer here will be enhanced, which will further promote the development of the ice horn. On the contrary, under wind shear icing conditions, such kind of “positive feedback” mechanism is missing. Therefore, the uppermost ice horn is suppressed.
4.2.3. The ice shape simulation results at −5.0 °C
With the further increase of the temperature, the collected water on the leading edge of local airfoils is more difficult to freeze and has to continue to flow on the surface of ice accretion until it encounters a high convective heat transfer zone. Fig. 15 illustrates the comparison of the ice shape development at -5 °C. It can be seen that at this condition, a significantly thinner and longer ice horn is formed at the leading edge of the blade, especially near the tip region.
Fig. 15
Download: Download high-res image (800KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 15. Transient ice shape comparison among different WSC conditions of Case 3.

This kind of ice shape is mainly determined by the convective heat transfer process during the ice shape development. In Fig. 16 the convective heat transfer coefficients at 0s, 540s, 1620s, and 3600s and the corresponding ice shapes are plotted. Before ice accretion, there is a smooth peak on the curve of the convective heat transfer coefficient, which is due to the increase of the flow velocity on the suction side of the local airfoil. When icing time reaches 540s, there is a small ice horn formed on the upper side of the airfoil. The convective heat transfer coefficient first increases and then decreases rapidly. The consequence of this is that water film is more likely to be freezing in the tip region where the ice horn is located. When icing time reaches the 1620s and 3600s, as the ice horn continues to increase, this trend is dramatically enhanced and finally, a single ice horn structure is formed on the leading edge of the wind turbine blade.
Fig. 16
Download: Download high-res image (447KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 16. Comparison of heat transfer coefficients and the corresponding ice shapes at different icing times of 97.8 % span position.

It should be also noticed that at −5.0 °C the wind shear icing has a similar effect as the condition of −15.0 °C. The larger the WSC, the more suppressed the multi-ice-horn structures behind the main ice horn. This phenomenon may be caused by the following reasons. Firstly, under the glaze icing condition, the convective heat transfer plays an important role in determining the ice formation. Compared with the uniform inflow condition, the wind shear effect leads to the periodical variation of inflow AoA, which will cause the peak of the convective heat transfer to change position on the airfoil surface. The growth trend of ice protrusions can be suppressed. Secondly, the wind shear effect also weakens the “positive feedback” mechanism of ice accumulation, since the changing inflow will to some extent reduce the shadowing effect of the main ice horn.
In summary, by comparing the ice shapes formed under different WSCs (Figs. 10, Fig.12, and Fig. 15), it can be seen that the WSC plays different roles in the development of ice shapes under different temperatures. In Rime ice conditions (−30 °C), due to the enhancement of the water droplet impingement, the WSC can prompt the small ice structure development behind the main ice horn. However, in Glaze ice conditions with moderate freezing temperature (−15 °C), the multiple ice structure is suppressed by the wind shear effect mainly because of the combination effect of the water impingement shadowing and the reduction of the heat transfer effect. When the temperature is -5 °C, the wind shear condition mainly affects the blade tip region where the multiple ice horn structures at the suction side of the airfoil are dramatically suppressed at larger WSC conditions.
5. Conclusion
To simulate the complex wind shear icing phenomenon, the Improved Multi-Shot Icing Computational Model (IMSICM) is applied in this paper, in which a VII solver is coupled and different time scales related to the dynamic icing features are utilized. The computational capability of IMSICM is fully validated by the icing wind tunnel experimental results of CARDC IWT and NASA IRT.
Based on the IMSICM, the wind shear icing process of the NREL 5 MW wind turbine is computed and the transient ice shape development is analyzed. The results show that: i) under the Rime icing environment, the overall ice shape changes linearly over time, while for Glaze ice, the nonlinear behavior of the ice development is greatly enhanced; ii) the influence of wind shear on Rime ice formation is relatively small except that it can promote the multi-ice-horns behind the main ice shape, which is mainly due to the periodic changes in the distribution of water impingement; iii) in glaze icing condition, the wind shear inflow can greatly suppress the ice protrusion development behind the main ice horn because the peak of the convective heat transfer on the local airfoil is variable and the “positive feedback” ice accretion mechanism is weakened.
The findings of current research may shed light on the complex mechanism of wind turbine dynamic icing, which can provide a deeper understanding of the phenomenon of wind turbine icing under wind shear conditions. In the future, an additional ice shedding simulation module will be involved in IMSICM and the wind shear icing process in different wind farms will be analyzed.