1. Introduction
Climates exposed to freezing temperatures commonly experience icing phenomena. As wind energy projects continue to be developed in these regions, surfaces of wind turbine blades are inevitably exposed to icing. An icing event is characterized by the several stages that a wind turbine endures. Identification of these phases allows insight of the required management of mitigation strategies to control the amount and rate of ice accumulation on a wind turbine to prevent further negative repercussion of icing on turbine blades.
Ice accumulation typically occurs on surfaces exposed to atmospheric conditions in which liquid water content and near freezing temperatures or high convective cooling rates exist, such as in cold damp windy weather or in cold climates that experience frost, snow and freezing rain. The type of ice that forms in the atmosphere is dependent on several factors, such as air temperature, relative humidity, barometric pressure, wind speed, air density, altitude and the physical atmospheric processes that create the initial cloud formation. Furthermore, the ice that accumulates on the substrate of a wind turbine blade is also dependent on the temperature of the substrate surface, the velocity of impact and the surrounding atmospheric conditions. As explained by Loughborough [1], the force of adhesion is approximated to be linear with temperature, increasing 5976 kg/m2 for each degree centigrade decrease in temperature. The significance of this value indicates that a reduction in the adhesion force of the ice would greatly improve ice shedding and the resulting performance of the turbine.
There are two distinct types of icing, glaze and rime, each having different characteristics. Often, there will be a “mixed” icing regime that is a combination of these two types. The characterization of mixed ice accretion is more involved due to the different proportions of both glaze and rime ice. In this experiment only glaze and rime icing are evaluated.
Glaze ice occurs at temperatures just below freezing, in atmospheric conditions of high liquid water content [2]; creating an ice that is clear and dense. Traditionally, glaze ice forms at temperatures between 0 °C and −4 °C. In the University of Manitoba Icing Tunnel Facility (UMITF), glaze ice has been simulated at a temperature of −5 °C. In glaze icing, part of the water droplets freeze upon impact and the remainder run along the surface before freezing, forming a smooth lumpy profile shape of high-density clear ice. Glaze ice is expected to be more difficult to remove than rime ice due to its inherent physical properties, including higher adhesion pressure [3].
Rime ice occurs at colder temperatures of low liquid water content, freezing before contact with the substrate and accumulating in layers mixed with air pockets. Traditionally, rime ice forms at surface temperatures between −4 °C and −12 °C [2]. In the UMITF, rime ice has been simulated at a temperature of −15 °C. In rime icing, super cooled water droplets freeze immediately upon impact and form a low-density ice, white and feathery in appearance.
Icing is problematic to the safe and efficient operation of wind turbine blades resulting in reduced performance of the machine. Thus, it is important to prevent ice accumulation on the surface of turbine blades and remove it when necessary. Some of the potential problems that ice accumulation may create for a wind turbine include: increased loads on blades, reduced aerodynamic efficiency, vibrations, turbulence, structural degradation, reduced power performance, safety issues, and operational stoppage.
2. The phases of icing
During the process of ice accumulation, the wind turbine is subjected to various icing phases. Some of these phases allow the turbine to remain operational; however, if the limit for load bearing capacity is reached, or if there is a significant threat of ice-throw or the structural health of the turbine is jeopardized, the turbine is said to have reached its operational limit and must be stopped. The operational limit of the turbine will vary in each situation and is determined by turbine design limits in response to environmental conditions and surrounding safety limitations.
A non-mitigated wind turbine blade is defined as not having any interventions in place to prevent or deal with icing issues. It is also referred to as the “datum” surface for comparison purposes. From studying the accumulation of ice over time at the leading edge of a non-mitigated and mitigated wind turbine blade, four main phases of an icing event are identified as presented in Table 1:
Table 1. Definition of phases of icing for non-mitigated and mitigated wind turbine blades.

Non-mitigated	Mitigated
1. Pre-Icing: the turbine is operational before the onset of an icing event; blades are clean; airflow can be with or without water droplets; single phase heat transfer coefficient from liquid water droplets occurs [4].	1. Pre-Icing_M: the turbine is operational before the onset of an icing event; blades are clean; airflow can be with or without water droplets; single phase heat transfer coefficient from liquid water droplets occurs [4].
2. Operational-Icing: the icing event begins and the turbine is operational from the onset of icing and through the period of ice accumulation, until its operational limit is reached.	2. Operational-Icing_M: the icing event begins and the turbine is operational from the onset of icing and through the period of ice accumulation, until its operational limit is reached.
3. Stopped-Icing: the icing event continues and the turbine is non-operational; ice may continue to accumulate on the blades, exist without change or begin to be removed.	3. Stopped-Icing_M: the icing event continues and the turbine is non-operational; ice may continue to accumulate on the blades; ice may continue to exist without change or ice may begin to be removed. The downtime of the turbine is likely to be shortened.
4. Post-Icing: the icing event has stopped; the turbine remains non-operational or may become operational depending on icing loads or residual damage that requires attention.	4. Post-Icing_M: the icing event has stopped; the turbine remains non-operational or may become operational depending on icing loads or residual damage that requires attention.
The scenario for a non-mitigated wind turbine is presented in Fig. 1. Typically, a non-mitigated wind turbine is forced to be stopped once the onset of ice accumulation occurs on the blades; however, even though the turbine is not operating, ice still continues to accumulate on the blades. Also, when the icing event has stopped, ice remains on the blades and the wind turbine is forced to remain non-operational until the ice melts away. Evidently, this method is ineffective for electricity generation; however, it is the only way to preserve the wind turbine since it does not have a mitigation package. Iced blades reduce performance and produce vibrations and excessive loading on the turbine structure.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Typical scenarios of ice accumulation on wind turbine blades.

The scenario for a mitigated wind turbine is presented in Fig. 2. The mitigation strategies attempt to reduce the “stopped” phase of the turbine, and enhance the operational time by beginning immediately upon complete ice removal, as shown in Fig. 2a. Even more so, the mitigation strategies remove any ice that has accumulated and allow the turbine to operate despite an icing event, as shown in Fig. 2b.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Typical scenarios of ice accumulation on wind turbine blades.

Depending on the mitigation strategy, the mitigation may become effective before the operational limit of the turbine is reached, as in the case represented by the thinnest line (i). This case shows that the turbine remains operational throughout the entire icing event despite slight accumulation. A second scenario indicates control of the ice accumulation such that the operational limit of the turbine is not reached; however, it would require a shortened period of time in the “stopped” phase to endure the remaining melt period. This is depicted by the mid-line (ii) scenario. A third case involves a mitigation strategy that aids in reducing the stopped period of the turbine. However, this case does not become effective until after the operational limit of the turbine is reached, showing that the turbine needs to be stopped while ice continues to accumulate on the blades, as depicted by the thickest line (iii). Regardless of the mitigation, the “stopped” period is reduced as compared to the non-mitigated scenario.
Simplifying, the three scenarios of mitigation can be explained as follows, respective to the line indicators above:
i)
The mitigation strategy is most effective at controlling ice accumulation such that icing is controlled before reaching the operational limit of the turbine and removed before the turbine needs to be shutdown.
ii)
Accumulation rate is further reduced, mitigation is effective before the turbine reaches operational limit, and requires being shutdown to remove ice accumulation.
iii)
Ice accumulates past operational limit and turbine needs to be shut down; in comparison to a non-mitigated case, accumulation is less and rate of melt is greater (ice removal is improved), mitigation is effective after the turbine is shutdown despite further ice accumulation.
The three scenarios presented can be related to the performed experimental mitigation strategies. The last case, labeled scenario (iii), represents the surface mitigation which is least effective at controlling ice accumulation. The, second case, labeled scenario (ii), represents the thermal mitigation which reduced the accumulation more effectively than the surface mitigation but not as effectively as the Thermface™ strategy, identified by the first scenario labeled (i). This case indicated that the combination of the strategies applied in related climatic conditions would be the most effective at controlling ice accumulation on the blades.
3. Icing experiment
The University of Manitoba accommodates a unique experimental icing tunnel facility (UMITF) for aerodynamic icing research in the Faculty of Engineering. The mitigation experiment was conducted in the UMITF to determine if ice accumulation could be controlled, reduced or prevented. Since the basis of this research work is experimental, all collected data and results are produced within the limitations of the experimental design apparatus.
The UMITF consists of a spray system to emit droplets into the flow and a refrigeration system for cooling of the air, as shown in Fig. 3 [5]. Experiments are conducted using stationary scaled-airfoils placed within the inner duct (1 m2) of the wind tunnel. The rotation of the blades are beyond the scope of this research at this time, as stationary characteristics are desired to be understood prior to the addition of further dynamic forces encountered in rotating blades. Scaled test specimens are subjected to cooled airflows containing water droplets (filtered and distilled) that are released into the flow stream from a customized spray bar located upstream of the aerofoil test piece. The air atomizing nozzles produce a reliable spray pattern with water mean droplet diameters ranging from 10 to 3 to 10 to 5 m, per manufacturers specifications. The droplets travel in a trajectory towards the test specimen, are cooled along the way and freeze upon impact with the test specimen forming various ice shapes and characteristics, according to the climatological conditions of the conducted experiment. To understand the fundamental dynamics of the complex three-phase system that occur during icing, the initial phase of the experiment was designed to minimize variables. Thus, blade specimens are held in a fixed stationary position at a single angle of attack of zero degrees. Only the two distinct glaze and rime icing regimes are generated. From the wind tunnel calibration, the simulated climatological conditions for testing are selected based on the parameters that create the most representative conditions for glaze and rime icing. In the UMITF, to obtain glaze and rime icing with a wind condition representative of actual climatological conditions in the region of interest (Southern Manitoba), the experimental testing required the blower motor to be fixed at 15.5 Hz which corresponds to 7.37 m/s at −5 °C and 7.97 m/s at −15 °C, for glaze and rime conditions, respectively. Other parameters that need to be balanced to ensure these icing conditions are properly simulated include water liquid-line temperature and air-line pressure for the air atomizing nozzles to create the ideal liquid water content (LWC) for the system. An imbalance in LWC can create too “wet” or “dry” ice, and must be balanced with the flow speed and distance to the object that is subjected to icing in order to ensure the liquid properly cools and does not prematurely evaporate or solidify before contact with the specimen substrate, as all these factors contribute to the resulting ice form and its characteristics.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Top view of UMITF [5].

An icing event is characterized by several naturally occurring parameters such as barometric pressure, wind speed, relative humidity and air temperature. For a simulated icing event in controlled conditions, these parameters along with other conditions must be set and closely monitored to ensure the icing event occurs as required. In icing related applications, the actual droplet size distribution in clouds is represented by a single variable called the droplet's median volume diameter (MVD). The MVD is the midpoint in the liquid water content (LWC) distribution over the range of cloud droplet sizes that are present in a given moment of time. Thus, the MVD varies with the number of droplets in each size category. The overall average LWC and MVD have been conservatively approximated for this experiment in accordance with published data [6]. The properties of the air atomizing nozzles in the spray bar apparatus of the UMITF represent icing droplet concentrations and sizes that are slightly greater than those of a freezing fog or stratiform cloud and lesser than those of a convective (cumuliform) cloud.
The experimental apparatus consists of the UMITF; the test specimen mounted within the UMITF; the camera and data acquisition system positioned perpendicular to the flow outside of the inner tunnel. The surface mitigation strategies were limited to three different surfaces. One surface remained as a datum (untreated), while the two others used different types of coatings, referred to as icephobic and hydrophobic. Icephobic refers to the ability of the coating to easily shed ice and reduce the adhesion force of the ice to the surface. Hydrophobic refers to the ability of the coating to shed liquid with ease. The thermal mitigation was limited to a single technique with two different heating regimes, referred to as anti-icing and de-icing. The anti-icing regime began at the onset of icing, while the de-icing regime was initiated half-way through the test once ice had already accumulated on the blade surface. The combinations of these techniques lead to the development of a third mitigation strategy, termed Thermface™ [7].
The test specimen is based on the shape of a NACA 63421 aerofoil profile with aluminum frame and fiberglass sheeting. The selected NACA profile is commonly used in the wind turbine blade manufacturing industry. For this experimental series, six test pieces with the various mitigation strategies were required to investigate the surface, thermal and thermface mitigation strategies. The specimen without a heater or coating is used as a datum. The icephobic coated specimen is black, whereas the hydrophobic coated specimen is white, and the plain, uncoated specimen is the original composite fiberglass colour, yellow. The specimens are shown in Fig. 4 [7] as mounted for testing.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Aerofoil test sections mounted in tunnel (L–R): hydrophobic, icephobic, plain.

All thermally mitigated specimens have two 0.508 × 0.127 m, 12 V and 5 W heaters, mounted on each of the upper and lower leading edge surfaces. All Thermface™ specimens contain both coatings and heaters. Fig. 5 depicts the red thermal heaters as mounted in the leading edge of the airfoils.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Thermal heaters as mounted in the leading edge.

Preparation of the experiment is initialized a minimum of one hour in advance of testing to ensure appropriate water temperature for icing, while the test apparatus is rigged. Multiple test runs are completed with a minimum of three trials per mitigation strategy. Results are averaged in the analysis of icing characteristics to account for experimental error and natural variations. Tests are conducted for 20 min. Deicing is initiated at 10 min, the midpoint of the test. Photographs are taken at 1 min intervals for the duration of the test. Collected image data was processed using graphics software to determine changes in ice accumulation rate.
The results provide an indication of the rate at which ice accumulates on the surface in a given test condition, dependent on climatic condition and mitigation strategy. This accumulation can also be interpreted as ice thickness at the leading edge. The results also provide an indication of the intensity of the mitigation strategy that is required to effectively control the adverse effects of ice accumulation.
4. Ice accumulation experimental results
Several forms of data have been recorded from the icing experiment. Observation of ice accumulation on the leading edge of the blade profile has provided a measurement of the length that the ice extends through the accumulation period; as well as the amount of accumulated ice (in liquid state), and the rate at which the accumulation occurs. From this data, the most relevant characteristic to the phases of icing is the rate of accumulation. Fig. 6 shows an example of glaze ice accumulation on the leading edge of the aerofoil.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Accumulation on leading edge of aerofoil in test chamber.

Collected image data are processed using graphics software to determine changes in ice accumulation rate. The results provide an indication of the rate at which ice accumulates on the surface in a given test condition, dependent on climatic condition and mitigation strategy. This accumulation can also be interpreted as ice thickness at the leading edge. The results also provide an indication of the intensity of the mitigation strategy that is required to effectively control the adverse effects of ice accumulation. The area shown below can be expanded for greater detail of the process and results of rate of accumulation, as shown in Fig. 7, Fig. 8.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Glaze ice accumulation rate for various mitigation techniques.


Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Rime ice accumulation for various mitigation techniques.

The presented charts provide a detailed description of the resulting experimental icing accumulation rates and provide a comparison of all the mitigation strategies for a specific icing regime. These are the details of what is occurring in terms of icing accumulation in the “operational-icing” phase of an icing event. Detailed experimental data is only expressed for this phase of the icing chart at this time.
Comparison of the results for the rate of accumulation between glaze and rime icing conditions indicates that on an uncoated plain surface, glaze ice accumulation rate is 5% less than rime. When surface mitigation is used, the rate of ice accumulation on a wind turbine blade is more effectively reduced. By employing the icephobic coating, ice accumulation rate (IAR) is 52% less in glaze than in rime, while using the hydrophobic coating IAR is 80% less in glaze than in rime. Comparing the surface mitigation techniques, in glaze conditions, the IAR is reduced by 12% with the icephobic coating and 18% by the hydrophobic coating. In rime conditions, surface mitigation does not effectively reduce IAR, suggesting that the mitigation strategy has reached its maximum capacity to be effective for the given climatological conditions. In comparison of the thermal mitigation techniques, for glaze conditions, the anti-icing regime effectively reduces IAR by 24%, whereas the de-icing regime is ineffective for reducing IAR. In rime conditions, neither thermal mitigation regime effectively reduces IAR suggesting that the technique has reached its maximum capacity to be effective in the given conditions. The Thermface™ strategy employing the hydrophobic coating with the de-icing regime reduces IAR by 72% in glaze conditions and is the only thermface strategy to perform effectively. In rime conditions, there is not a single overall mitigation strategy that indicates a reduction in IAR. Isolating individual variables for further insight to these results indicates that the icephobic coating with anti-icing provides a reduction in IAR when compared to both surface and thermal mitigations individually. This Thermface™ technique effectively reduces IAR by 20% over surface mitigation alone and 14% over anti-icing thermal mitigation alone; thereby suggesting that it would be the most effective mitigation strategy in rime conditions for controlling IAR. Evidently, IAR is more easily mitigated in glaze than in rime conditions. The most effective mitigation strategy is the Thermface™ technique where in glaze conditions, the hydrophobic coating with the de-icing regime is employed, and in rime, the icephobic coating with the anti-icing regime is employed. These results are indicative of the correlation between the sensitivity of the behaviour of the ice to the employed mitigation strategy, (i.e. rime icing, which is a more severe case, requires a more intense mitigation technique to effectively control the icing accumulation rate).
The above results can be expressed in more simplified terms through individual graphs for each mitigation strategy (surface, thermal and thermface) and icing regime as follows in Fig. 9 for glaze ice and Fig. 10 for rime ice.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Surface, thermal and thermface icing mitigation for glaze icing.


Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 10. Surface, thermal and thermface icing mitigation for rime icing.

A further extension of this study is the Profile Shape Catalogue (PSC), a culmination of all the collected visual data for the simulated icing events over a period of 20 min. The PSC complements the icing phases chart and the results charts in that it provides a visual representation of the changes in shape of the aerofoil profile, while providing an indication of the amount of ice that accumulates, the amount the profile extends, and a visual suggestion of the rate of ice accumulation over the experiment duration. This resource tool further improves the understanding of ice accumulation at the leading edge of the aerofoil at different phases in the icing process and provides a comparison of mitigation effectiveness. A sample of the resulting icing event profile shapes are depicted in Fig. 11, at the beginning (0 min.), mid (10 min.) and end (20 min.) stages of the icing event for the surface, thermal and Thermface™ mitigation strategies in both glaze and rime icing conditions, indicating the ice growth at the leading edge for the various mitigation strategies.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 11. IAR sample catalogue.

5. Conclusion
For reducing accumulation amount, it is shown that in glaze or rime conditions, the Thermface™ strategy employing the de-icing thermal regime with the icephobic surface coating is the most effective mitigation. Furthermore, it would be even more effective if the duration of thermal mitigation is extended to enhance mitigative efforts against the amount of ice accumulation in more severe icing conditions, such as rime.
For controlling icing accumulation rate and profile shape extension, glaze icing will be effectively mitigated with the minimalist strategy while rime icing requires the most intense strategy. This indicates the sensitivity of the behaviour of the ice to the employed mitigation strategy. The specific solution for each icing condition is the hydrophobic coating with the de-icing regime in glaze, and the icephobic coating with the anti-icing regime in rime.
Understanding the phases of an icing event defined through the process of ice accumulation, is key to improved management of turbine operation in an icing event. The recommended mitigation strategies allow a means for managing the adverse effects of icing on turbine operation. The chart provides a useful tool for understanding the characteristics of ice accumulation on the wind turbine through pre-to-post icing phases.