Introduction
A local refinery used two T-type pumps for
circulating naphtha from CDU (continuous
distillation unit) column after cooling. After a 5-
year service life, it was observed that the strainer
*For correspondence; Ijaz_hussain1@hotmail.com
mesh and the supporting plate of the two pumps
(A & B) failed as the 304 SS material changed
from ductile to brittle state and cracked. The
details of the strainer and its operating conditions
are given in Table 1.
The composition of naphtha provided by the
company is given in Table 2.
The piping circuit, made of carbon steel, showed
insignificant corrosion. The pump strainer (15 x
Table 1
Operating Conditions of the naphtha pumps, A & B.
Table 2
Circulating naphtha composition.
Naptha pump failure 296
15 cm) was found badly damaged. The screen
material became brittle and could be detached
easily at some locations. The failure was similar
for both pumps (A and B, working and standby,
respectively). A simplified drawing of the strainer
mesh used by the local refinery is shown in
Fig. 1.
Materials and Methods
Considering the nature of the problem a
simple sequence of experiments was carried out
on samples taken from strainer mesh and
supporting plate i.e., wet chemical analysis (for
material confirmation), microscopy (for nature
of corrosion) and hardness (change in material
nature due to residual or pressure stresses). The
following considerations were kept in focus in
order to evaluate application of stainless steel:
compatibility of material and fabrication method,
uniform corrosion, localized corrosion, effect of
size or appearance change due to corrosion,
ultimate service life, stress types (residual or
applied), stress source, probability of stress
corrosion cracking due to material, stress and
chemical species present.
The study involved wet chemical analysis
of specimens taken from strainer mesh and
Fig 1. T-Type Pump Strainer
supporting plate SS 304 (ASTM E353, a standard
practice for wet chemical analysis) light
microscopy (specimens taken from strainer mesh
and supporting plate SS 304) for evaluating the
nature of cracks and corrosion, and hardness test
for material strength.
Wet chemical analysis
The samples were subjected to the following
tests at TSC/PSQCA (Technical Services Centre,
Pakistan Standard and Quality Control Authority,
Government of Pakistan) laboratories. Standard
test method for wet chemical analysis of
stainless was adopted to study its composition.
It was considered to be the most suitable option
available technically and economically. ASTM
E353 (a standard method for wet chemical
analysis) covers the chemical analysis of stainless
steel, heat resisting, maraging and other similar
Cr-Ni-Fe alloys having chemical composition
within the scope of the standard [1].
Micro-structural Study
Samples from the working (A) and standby
(B) pumps were prepared for microstructural
study using an optical light microscope. Samples
were observed both in the unetched and the
etched condition. The samples were cut-off to
the required size prior to mounting in
thermosetting resin. Grinding progressed from
coarse to smooth, (i.e. from 120 to 1000 grain
size of SiC paper). Later, the samples were
polished with 1 µm diamond paste and washed
with acetone. The samples were observed at
magnifications of 100-200 times. Etching of the
samples was done with Kailling’s reagent [40 ml
distilled water, 2 g copper chloride (CuCl2), 40
ml hydrochloric acid, 60 ml ethanol (85%)].
Hardness Testing
Hardness of the samples taken from the
strainer mesh and supporting plate (made of SS
297 Muhammad A. Butt et al.
304) of pump A and B were tested by using
Rockwell Hardness machine. The operating
parameters are given in Table 3. Scale A was used
in the present case.
Results
The visual and metallographic examination
of the samples of the strainer and the plate (from
both pumps) confirmed that the failure of the 304
SS had occurred by SCC (Stress Corrosion
Cracking).
Unetched samples showed globular oxides
and transgranular stress corrosion cracks (Figs.
2, 5 and 6). The samples were brittle and
consisted of numerous cracks.
Table 3
Hardness of Testing Parameters.
Fig 2. Typical branched transgranular stress
corrosion cracks. Unetched, X 200. Strainer sample.
Fig 3. The sample reveals the austenite grains with
transgranular stress corrosion crack.
Etched, X 200. Strainer sample.
Fig 4. The sample reveals the austenite
grain boundaries. Etched, X 200. Strainer sample.
Fig 5. Typical Transgranular Stress
Corrosion Cracks. Unetched, X 200. Supporting Plate.
Naptha pump failure 298
The structure of the samples etched with
Kailling’s Reagent consisted of austenite grains;
fine chromium carbide precipitates transgranular
stress corrosion cracks (Figs.3, 4 and 7).
Branched cracks are evident running across the
grain boundaries. Intergranular corrosion (IGC)
was observed in the strainer sample (Fig. 4).
Table 4 shows the results of the chemical
analysis, which reveals that the composition of
the specimens taken from the strainer mesh and
the supporting plate is very close to 304 SS.
It is obvious that the use of AISI 304 SS for
the strainer mesh and supporting plate (SS 304)
of T-Type naphtha pumps was not correct. Idle
time of pumps contributed towards SCC. The
Fig 6. Stress Corrosion Cracks.
Unetched, X 100. Supporting Plate.
Fig 7. The sample reveals transgranuler stress corrosion
cracks and the austenite grains. Etched, X 100.
Supporting Plate.
presence of H2
S in wet condition (sulfur and
moisture present in naphtha (Table 2) causes
formation of H2
S) provided an aggressive
environment leading to stress corrosion cracking.
Suitability factor is also clear from Table 6 in
H2
S wet condition (corrosive media can be found
with type 4 materials and SS 304 falls in this
category).
The type 304 SS material for the strainer
was sensitized during welding and suffered
intergranular corrosion during service.The
material suffered SCC and IGC which resulted
in the ultimate failure of the strainer and the plate.
The hardness values of the samples taken
from the strainer mesh and the supporting plate
SS 304 are appended below:
No change was found in hardness of the new and
used strainer and plate material. Results are given
in Table 5.
Table 4
Chemical analysis of specimens taken from the strainer
mesh and the supporting plate SS 304.
Table 5
Hardness of the samples taken from the strainer mesh
and the supporting plate of used and un-used pump.
299 Muhammad A. Butt et al.
Discussion
Stress Corrosion Cracking
Table 6 presents a large number of environments that have caused stress corrosion cracking
(SCC) of various metals and alloys under certain
specific conditions. A classic example of this type
of localized corrosion is chloride-SCC of
austenitic (300 series) stainless steels which
result in brittleness and usually transgranular
fracture of an otherwise ductile alloy, often
causing a catastrophic equipment failure. The
present failure of the strainer occurred in about
5 years.
SCC failures are macroscopically brittle in
the sense that the ductility and load bearing
capacity of the material are impaired.
Microscopically, the cracks are either intergranular or transgranular and cleavage-like. In
duplex microstructures, one phase often cracks
more easily than the other, leading to characteristic cracking patterns. Plastic deformation
always accompanies crack growth and plays a
key role in most cracking mechanism. Sometimes
the fracture surfaces show evidence of stepwise
(discontinuous) crack advance, especially in
transgranular SCC. Stress corrosion cracking
initiation at smooth surfaces shows a threshold
stress (σth) that varies from 20% to more than
100% of the yield stress (σ
y
), depending upon
the metal and the environment. Thermal stress
relief of welded or cold-worked components can
prevent SCC if σth/σ
y is failrly high, e.g., 0.7.
SCC is usually nucleated by some form of
localized corrosion. In chloride-SCC or stainless
steel or aluminum alloys, cracks start from areas
of pitting, intergranular corrosion, or crevice
corrosion that creates the stress concentration and
the acidity required for cracking. Intergranular
corrosion occurs along segregated zones rich in
carbon, nitrogen or phosphorous and provide a
stress concentration [2].
Role of H2
S
Presence of H2
S or its oxidation product
S2
O3
2- (thiosulfate) greatly enhances localized
corrosion and chloride-SCC of austenitic and
duplex stainless steels. Concentration of H2
S
required to start SCC is called critical concentration and it is 0.01M for SS; below this concentration H2
S is depleted in deep pits and cracks.
Nonpropagating cracks are found around H2
S,
while crack tips are H2
S run out sites. Enhancement of SCC by H2
S is often ascribed to a hydrogen effect as given in the literature [2].
Selection Criteria for Stainless Steel
Selection of a proper stainless steel for
typical environment requires several considerations. The first consideration is corrosion
resistance. For mild atmosphere, type 430 grades
are recommended. For industrial atmosphere,
type 430 grades are considered. In case of many
food processing environments and mild
corrodents, type 304 are available, chemical and
severe corrodents require type 316 or the high
alloyed type such as 20Cb-3. The second
consideration is design criterion of mechanical
properties such as yield strength. It may be noted
that high strength stainless steels often sacrifice
resistance to some form of corrosion especially
SCC. The third consideration is fabricability, e.g.
ability of the stainless steel to be machined,
welded or formed. The corrosion resistance of
the fabricated article to the environment must be
examined in the light of chemical species, pH,
aeration, flow rate, impurities such as chloride
as well as temperature and heat transfer and
crevice effect. [3]
Sensitization
Several of the high-nickel, high molybdenum steels are quite satisfactory with regard
to stress corrosion attack in most industrial
applications. Both 316, 317 steels contain about
Naptha pump failure 300
Table 6
Corrosion and Selection of Material [7]
301 Muhammad A. Butt et al.
2 to 3% molybdenum. They resist corrosion in
reducing acids. The austenite stainless steels are
sensitized to intergranular attack (IGA) by
welding or by longer term exposure to temperatures in the range 435o
C to 815o
C. The
precipitation of chromium carbide occurs at the
grain boundaries and the depletion of chromium
from adjacent areas takes place. Sensitization can
be considerably delayed or prevented by the use
of low carbon grade (<0.03%C) and stabilizers
like Ti (type 321) and Cb or Ta (type 347) steels
[4].
Intergranular corrosion takes place
preferentially at grain boundaries and it is usually
the result of sensitization. There are four different
theories for intergranular corrosion, namely
chromium depletion theory, stress theory,
microcell theory and segregation theory.
According to the chromium depletion theory,
chromium content is reduced in regions adjacent
to the precipitating chromium carbide. When
chromium carbide level falls below that required
for passivation, the material becomes susceptible
to IGC. The Stress theory states, local stresses
arise in those areas where secondary phases begin
to precipitate and grow. Due to this, considerable
energy differentials are produced in these zones.
This leads to imperfect passivation which results
in poor corrosion resistance. The Microcell
theory is based on the dissolution of grain
boundaries due to the formation of local cells,
the precipitate acting either as an anode or a
cathode. IGC is an electrochemical reaction
between the noble carbide particles acting as
cathode and the matrix acting as anode and
proceeds rapidly along grain boundary where
there is a continuous path provided by carbide
particles. According to the segregation theory,
IGC takes place due to the presence of continuous
grain boundary path of either second phase or
soluble segregate resulting from solute-vacancy
interaction. This theory explains that IGC arises
due to the segregation of impurity elements [5].
Information Necessary for Estimating Corrosion
Performance of a Material
Past experience and data should be gathered
regarding use of material in particular environment, its performance, any modification in the
past, corrosion monitoring data regarding pilotplant and actual field data.
On the basis of wet chemical analysis it was
confirmed that SS 304 was used for the strainer
and the plate. (Consider the limitations of this
method). AISI 304 is the most common type of
the stainless steel grades and has the combination
of desirable mechanical properties and corrosion
resistance with ease of fabrication for industrial
applications but it has many limitations. The
choice of material type 304 SS has to be
examined with the help of (Table 6). To estimate
a material’s corrosion performance we should
know all of the items listed in Table 6, Figs. 8
and 9 [7].
There are more than sixty types of stainless
steels. Many possess similar corrosion resistance,
but are designed for specific application, for
example corrodent corrosive level as indicated
in Figure 8.
Figure 8. Corrosion resistance trend in different alloys. Alloy
selection depends on corrosion resistance [7].
Naptha pump failure 302
It is clearly indicated in Figure 8 that type
304 stainless steel is used for mild corrodents.
Under the prevailing conditions of naphtha
circulation, the presence of H2
S in wet condition
greatly impairs the suitability of 304 stainless
steel in the naphtha pumps.
It is shown in Figure 9 that type 304 SS has lower
yield strength than type 316 SS which contains
2-3% molybdenum. Type 316 SS has higher
corrosion resistance in reducing environments.
Welding of austenitic stainless steel usually
results in weld metal with a dendritic and
inhomogeneous microstructure having a small
amount of delta-ferrite, M23C6
 carbides, sigma
etc., and significant segregation of major alloying
elements at the phase interfaces. The presence
of delta-ferrite leads to preferential corrosion
attack in the weld metal in certain environments.
Pits have been shown to nucleate preferentially,
depending on the alloy composition, either at the
austenite/delta-ferrite interfaces or inside the
dendrite cores of austenite. The ageing of weld
deposits, either during stress-relieving operations
or during exposure to high temperature in service,
leads to the formation of complex precipitate
Figure 9. Yield Strength and corrodent action classify a
multitude of stainless steels into 11 families [7].
microstructure. The inferior corrosion and
mechanical properties of the welded components
in comparison with the base metal are due to the
preferential corrosion attack at the alloy depleted
region, segregated interfaces, dendritic cores and
austenite/delta-ferrite and other secondary
precipitate interfaces in the weld metals. [5].
Normally, SCC will not occur if the
equipment/part is in compression. Failure is
triggered by a tensile stress that must approach
the yield stress of the metal. The stresses may be
from faulty installation or represent residual
stresses from welding, straightening, bending or
accidental denting of the component. Pits, which
act as stress concentration sites, will often initiate
stress corrosion cracking.
If austenitic steels are exposed to heattreatment of less then 870° C, they can be
sensitized. For this reason, local stress relief of
unstabilized austenitic stainless steel is usually
impractical, since the runout areas immediately
adjacent to the region being heat-treated will be
sensitized [6].
Conclusions and Recommendation
Type 304 SS is susceptible to stress
corrosion cracking when used for naphtha
feedstock. The choice of type 304 SS was not
correct due to its susceptibility to SCC (Stress
Corrosion Cracking) and IGC (Intergranular
Corrosion) due to sensitizing. Future failure can
be avoided by design modification, fabrication
changes, material changes and environmental
control. The change of material was recommended considering the present observations.
Selection of 316 L (low carbon) stainless steel
or carbon steel can reduce SCC & IGA problem.
It is also suggested that regular cleaning of
strainer after 20-25 days can improve the
efficiency and reduce the chances of blockage or
contaminations.