Abstract
Traditional heat exchangers often face challenges under operating conditions that simultaneously require efficient heat transfer and compact space. Triply periodic minimal surfaces (TPMS) have a compact structure and show great potential in terms of thermal performance. To further improve the thermal performance of TPMS structures, this research proposes embedding a layer of Voronoi texture on the surface of the standard Gyroid structure, with the thickness of the Gyroid surface texture adjusted by regulating the thickness (t) of the Voronoi. The effect of Voronoi textures on the thermal-hydraulic performance of Gyroid structures was analyzed, and the mechanism of enhanced heat transfer is explained. The results show that when t = 1.2 mm, the convective heat transfer coefficient (h) of the Gyroid structure was increased by 8.6 %–14.6 %, and the Nusselt number (Nu) was increased by 24.9 %–33.3 %. This is mainly because Voronoi textures can disrupt the flow boundary layer, enhance the mixing of near-wall fluid with the core flow, and increase the heat transfer area simultaneously. With the performance evaluation criterion (PEC) as an evaluation index, the optimal performance is achieved at t = 0.8 mm. The method in this study provides a new design idea for the structural optimization of heat exchangers with TPMS structures.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Triply periodic minimal surfaceGyroidVoronoi texturesThermal-hydraulic performanceHeat exchanger
Nomenclature		Greek symbols	
English symbols		μ	dynamic viscosity (Pa⋅s)
A	area (m2)	π	ratio of circumference to diameter
c	offset parameter (mm)	ρ	density (kg/m3)
Dh	hydraulic diameter (mm)	Subscripts	
h	convective heat transfer coefficient (W·m−2·K−1)	c	cold fluid domain
k	thermal conductivity (W/(m⋅K))	f	fluid
l	unit cell size (mm)	h	hot fluid domain
L	Length of Gyroid structure (mm)	i	inlet
Δp	pressure drop (Pa)	o	outlet
heat transfer rate (W)	s	solid
t	thickness of Voronoi (mm)	w	wall
T	temperature (K)	0	reference
ΔT	temperature difference between inlet and outlet (K)	Dimensionless parameters	
U	inlet velocity (m/s)	f	Fanning friction factor
V	volume (m3)	Nu	Nusselt number
WHF	wall heat flux (W/m2)	Re	Reynolds number
X	X axis	PEC	performance evaluation criterion
Y	Y axis	VBPD	volume-based power density
Z	Z axis		
1. Introduction
As a device for achieving efficient waste heat recovery [1,2], heat exchangers are widely used in aviation [3], power electronics [4], chemical industry [5]. Due to the restrictions on the spatial dimensions of heat exchangers in many working environments, they are usually required to not only have strong heat exchange capacity, but also meet the requirements of compact structure and light weight. Conventional heat exchangers such as shell and tube exchangers [6] and plate and fin heat exchangers [7] are limited by their structural characteristics, making it difficult to simultaneously meet the requirements of weight reduction and enhanced heat transfer. A type of surface known as triply periodic minimal surface (TPMS) has a large specific surface area, a continuous smooth surface, low relative density, and zero mean curvature. It is also periodic in three orthogonal directions. Due to these unique structural features, TPMS is widely used in the fields of bone tissue engineering [8], energy absorbers [9], membrane reactors [10], and thermal management devices [[11], [12], [13], [14]]. The TPMS divides the space into two flow domains, which are not connected, suggesting that the design of the TPMS structure as a heat exchanger has a natural advantage and its complex internal structure can effectively induce turbulent flow, thus improving heat and mass transfer. As additive manufacturing technology [15] has advanced, the forming and processing of complex geometric structures has become a reality and is being applied in more and more fields.
In recent years, numerous scholars have studied the heat transfer characteristics of various TPMS structures. Femmer et al. [16] analyzed the flow and heat transfer performance of TPMS structures. Under the same pressure drop, the Schwarz-D structure exhibited the best heat transfer characteristics. Compared with flat plate heat exchangers and hollow tube structures, TPMS structures have significant advantages in heat transfer. Dong et al. [17] showed that the heat transfer coefficients of Schwarz-D and Gyroid structures were 23–38 % higher than those of Primitive structure. Reducing the size of TPMS units can further improve the heat exchanger performance, which is of great value for realizing lightweight and compact heat exchangers. Li et al. [18] analyzed the heat transfer capabilities of Gyroid, Schwarz-D structures, and PCHE. They discovered that, compared with PCHE, Gyroid and Schwarz-D structures enhanced heat transfer by 30–80 %, while flow resistance increased by 50–100 %. Under a given pumping power, the heat transfer coefficient of Gyroid and Schwarz-D structures was 16–120 % higher than PCHE. In addition, Yan et al. [19] analyzed the thermal-hydraulic performance of four TPMS structures. The merge-divert process promotes fluid mixing and enhances heat transfer, as compared to a traditional heat exchanger.
The optimal design of TPMS structures plays a vital role in improving their heat transfer performance. One category involves optimizing geometric parameters such as the shape [20], unit cell size [21], and wall thickness [22] of the TPMS structure. For instance, Novak et al. [20] achieved gradient variations in TPMS wall thickness and unit cell size along specific directions. Hu et al. [21] generated TPMS unit cells with different pore sizes depending on the region. In their review, Kirttayoth Yeranee et al. [22] provided a detailed account of the enhancing effects of porosity, wall thickness, and unit cell size on the flow characteristics and heat transfer performance of TPMS structures. The other category is realized through topology optimization methods. Yu Jiang et al. [23] used functions to directly control the wall thickness and topological structure of TPMS for model optimization. Kirttayoth Yeranee et al. [24] employed a topology optimization method based on density distribution to fill serpentine cooling channels with TPMS structures, aiming to enhance the thermal performance of the channels.
Changing the geometric shape of TPMS will affect its flow path, heat exchange area, and boundary layer thickness, thereby influencing its thermal-hydraulic performance. Wang et al. [25] illustrated that increasing the solid volume fraction of TPMS can enhance heat transfer but simultaneously increase the pressure drop, and the reduction in hydraulic diameter had a better effect on improving heat transfer than the adjustment of solid volume fraction. Tang et al. [26] introduced a lattice deformation control parameter α, and controlled the lattice deformation by adjusting α to reduce the “through-hole” area and increase the heat transfer area. When α = 0.25, the heat transfer area increased by 23.9 %, achieving a 19.9 %–28.9 % increase in h and a 13.0 %–20.3 % decrease in f. Yan et al. [27] proposed a lattice geometry stretching strategy to realize a substantial lessening of flow resistance at a moderate sacrifice of heat transfer performance by manipulating the streamwise periodic length (stretching ratio β) of the Gyroid structure. Compared with the baseline structure (β = 1.0), the pressure drop of the manipulated Gyroid (β = 2.0) was reduced by nearly 80 %, while the heat transfer rate only decreased by 28 %.
The creation of TPMS composite structures is mainly accomplished by introducing parameters to regulate the geometric structure or by superimposing two different structures. Qin et al. [28] introduced a “wrinkle” factor β into the Gyroid equation to regulate surface “wrinkles”. The results showed that the formation of “wrinkles” increased the heat transfer area and promoted turbulence between the fluid and the wall. Wei et al. [29] integrated fins into Diamond-HE and Gyroid-HE. The study showed that the fins induce secondary flow, disrupt the boundary layer, and can effectively enhance heat transfer. It is evident that adding flow-disturbing structures is an effective means to strengthen heat transfer. Liu et al. [30] proposed to skeletonize Voronoi [31] on the surface of TPMS to obtain better mechanical properties. The design strategy of such composite structures provides references for this study.
Selective laser melting (SLM) [32] can fabricate heat exchangers made of aluminum alloys and copper-based materials, so as to study the performance differences of TPMS structures under different metal materials. Mohamed G. Gado et al. [33] systematically reviewed the design methods, materials, and 3D printing technologies of TPMS structures in their review article, while also discussing the potential applications of TPMS structures in enhanced heat transfer and thermal management. Wang et al. manufactured TPMS structures using AlSi10Mg materials, focusing on the analysis of performance differences among various TPMS structures [34], different cell sizes [35], and functional gradient hybrid structures with different TPMS [36]. Similarly, Qian et al. [37] manufactured pure copper TPMS heat exchangers via SLM. The pure copper material significantly enhanced the volumetric heat transfer rate, providing an efficient and compact solution for electric vehicle thermal management systems. Gao et al. [38] manufactured TPMS pure copper heat exchangers, analyzed the deviation between the fabrication and design of the cell structure, and concluded that the roughness decreases with the increase in cell size. A comparison reveals that the SLM forming process for aluminum alloy TPMS structures is more mature.
In summary, to address the issues of efficient heat transfer and compact space required for heat exchangers in the field of thermal management, designing heat exchangers with stronger heat transfer capabilities has become an important solution. Adding flow-disturbing structures on the surface of specific structures is an effective method to enhance heat transfer. This approach primarily works by increasing the heat transfer area and intensifying flow disturbance, thereby achieving enhanced heat transfer. Therefore, this study proposes embedding a layer of Voronoi texture on the surface of a standard Gyroid structure and changing the thickness of the Voronoi texture to evaluate the effect of Voronoi texture on the heat transfer performance and flow characteristics of the Gyroid structure, while exploring its heat transfer enhancement mechanism. This study discusses the flow state of near-wall fluid within the Reynolds number range of 315–2350, and the correlations among convective heat transfer coefficient (
), Fanning friction coefficient (
), and Reynolds number (
) were specifically analyzed. The approach and findings of this study have significant guiding implications for raising the energy usage efficiency, in addition to offering novel suggestions for TPMS structure optimization to increase heat transfer capacity.
2. Method
2.1. Model design
The sheet-based TPMS structure is a kind of surface with zero average curvature defined by mathematical equations. Current research on TPMS-structured heat exchangers primarily focuses on configurations such as Gyroid, Diamond, and Primitive. Among these, the Gyroid structure has garnered particular attention from scholars due to its excellent heat transfer capability and moderate flow resistance. Therefore, this study selects the Gyroid structure as the specific implementation target. Table 1 lists the implicit function formula for Gyroid TPMS. Parameter l denotes the cell size, and parameter c denotes the offset of the surface. The Voronoi texture consists of continuous polygons formed by the perpendicular bisectors of adjacent points, and it is a geometric structure that divides space into multiple convex polygons. The Voronoi structure offers advantages such as adjustable structure and controllable transport characteristics. Therefore, this study opts to embed a layer of Voronoi texture onto the surface of a standard Gyroid structure. In this work, the creation and modification of the Gyroid structure were implemented using nTopology software.
Table 1. Implicit equations and cell geometry of Gyroid [19].

‐
Image 1
Fig. 1 illustrates the method of inlaying a layer of Voronoi textures on the surface of Gyroid TPMS structures. First, a standard Gyroid structure is created, converted into a mesh model, and the surface region of the Gyroid structure is extracted. Seed points for the Voronoi textures are generated on the Gyroid surface, which in turn generates the Voronoi textures, and finally, the Gyroid structure is textured by boolean union to obtain the improved Gyroid structure. The parametric design method can flexibly realize the customized design of TPMS structures, and the three key design parameters are (1) the thickness (t) of the Voronoi textures, (2) the Voronoi seed point count, and (3) the Voronoi seed point iteration count. Adjusting the thickness(t) of Voronoi, which can generate Voronoi textures with different thicknesses on the surface of the Gyroid structure, adjusting the Voronoi seed point count can control the denseness of the growth, and adjusting the number of iterations of the Voronoi seed points can change the distribution of their locations. The thickness of the texture features on the surface of the improved Gyroid is 0 when t = 0 mm, which is consistent with the standard Gyroid structure. By controlling these three key parameters, it is possible to precisely control the Voronoi textures features of the Gyroid structure without destroying its intrinsic structure and connectivity.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (723KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Method of inlaying Voronoi textures on the surface of Gyroid-TPMS structures.

Fig. 2 illustrates the model processing workflow for this study. Considering the multi-source errors in the simulation modeling and experimental process, to ensure the comparability and validity between the results, after repeated adjustments, the values of t are taken as 0 mm, 0.4 mm, 0.8 mm, and 1.2 mm, Voronoi seed point count is taken as 50, and Voronoi seed point iteration count is 10 times. The Gyroid structure under different t is shown in Fig. 3. It can be seen that by adjusting t, a layer of Voronoi texture is gradually formed on the surface of the Gyroid structure, which changes the surface morphology, but the overall structure of the Gyroid does not undergo significant changes. It can be observed from the plan view in Fig. 3 that the thickness of Voronoi textures increased with the increase of t, resulting in a more pronounced surface undulation. Meanwhile, the thickness distribution of the Voronoi texture on the Gyroid surface is uniform.
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (225KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Workflow of Gyroid structure heat exchanger.

Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Gyroid structure at different t values.

2.2. Computational model and boundary conditions
Considering that the selective laser melting process can achieve good surface quality when forming Gyroid structures, the cell size (l) of Gyroid was fixed at 10 mm, and the partition wall thickness (tw) was set to 1 mm. Choosing an appropriate computational domain is essential for improving computational efficiency and properly reflecting the flow state in the channel. To meet this requirement, the unit cells are arrayed 3 times in the three-dimensional X, Y, and Z directions of space, and the spatial dimensions of the final research object were 30 mm × 30 mm × 30 mm.
In model preprocessing, attribute naming definitions are performed on the model surface, and fluid domains are extracted. Since air has a low specific heat capacity, it can absorb the same amount of heat and cause a significant increase in temperature. Therefore, in numerical simulation and experiments, air is introduced into one fluid domain and hot water is introduced into the other fluid domain. Fig. 4 illustrates a schematic of the computational domain of the Gyroid structure at t = 0.8 mm. To avoid backflow interfering with the simulation results, an extension segment with a length of 90 mm was added at the inlet and outlet. The inlet temperatures of the cold fluid and hot fluid are set to 293K and 353K, respectively. Meanwhile, considering that the flow rate is controlled to regulate the flow velocity during the heat transfer experiment, the inlet velocity is thus derived from the flow rate. The flow rate range of the cold fluid is 5–30 L/min, with a corresponding inlet velocity range of 1.061 m/s–6.366 m/s. The flow rate of the hot fluid is 0.5 L/min, corresponding to an inlet velocity of 0.106 m/s. The Reynolds number range for the cold fluid is 315–2350. A pressure outlet boundary condition is adopted at the outlet. Cold and hot fluids are in contact with wall under no-slip boundary conditions, allowing heat transfer through the walls on both sides to achieve coupled heat exchange [19].
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (595KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Computational domain of the Gyroid structure (for example, t = 0.8 mm).

2.3. Mesh method and mesh independence analysis
In the mesh setup, FluentMeshing is used to generate polyhedral meshes for the computational domain. Unstructured meshes are employed for mesh construction. To accurately capture the fluid flow state near the wall, 10 expansion layers are set near the wall, with the thickness of the first layer being 1×10-5 m and a growth rate of 1.2. Combined with local mesh adaptive refinement, the mesh is refined at points of sudden curvature changes on the surface. For areas far from the wall surface, generate relatively coarse meshes to save computational resources and improve efficiency. The mesh details of the Gyroid structure at t = 0.8 mm are shown in Fig. 5. To ensure that the number of meshes does not have a destructive impact on the fluid flow state and heat transfer results in the heat exchanger, it is necessary to perform a grid independence verification. Taking the Gyroid physical model with t = 0.8 mm as an example, 7 sets of meshes are used for grid independence verification by changing the mesh size in different regions. Pressure drop loss and outlet temperature are used as evaluation parameters. Fig. 6 shows the outlet temperature and Δp under different numbers of grids. When the number of meshes exceeds 9,485,940, the changes in both parameters are within 0.5 %. Therefore, the setting of this mesh was adopted in the calculation.
Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Mesh details of the Gyroid structure model with t = 0.8 mm.

Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (236KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Grid independence verification [39].

2.4. Data reduction
When analyzing the flow characteristics in the channels, flow resistance is characterized by two indicators: pressure drop (
) and Fanning friction factor (f). First, the Reynolds number describes the flow state in the fluid region. The Reynolds number is defined as:
(1)
Where 
 is the hydraulic diameter, and 
 is the dynamic viscosity. Considering that TPMS is an irregular spatial geometric structure, the formula for the hydraulic diameter of TPMS adopted in this study follows the definition from the relevant literature [40,41], and the formula of the hydraulic diameter (
) is as follows:
(2)
Where V denotes the volume of the fluid domain and 
 denotes the wetted surface area of the TPMS.
To evaluate the thermal performance of the TPMS channel, the local convective heat transfer coefficient(
) and the average convective heat transfer coefficient(h) are calculated as follows [41]:
(3)
(4)
Where 
 represents the local wall temperature, and 
 denotes the local fluid temperature. 
 is the effective area.
Nusselt number (Nu) is an important measure of heat transfer capacity and is defined as follows [42]:
(5)
The definition of 
 is the difference between the mass-weighted average pressure at the inlet and outlet. This concept makes sense because, in contrast to the pressure drop at the core of heat exchanger, the pressure drop at the inlet and outlet extension sections is negligible and may be disregarded. The following is the formula for the Fanning friction coefficient (f):
(6)
The heat transfer rate (
) of the heat exchanger in this study was calculated using the following formula:
(7)
Furthermore, volume-based power density (VBPD) and performance evaluation criterion (PEC) are introduced to conduct a comprehensive performance evaluation of the heat exchanger. The calculation formulas are as follows [12,43]:
(8)
Where 
 denotes the volume of the Gyroid structure heat exchanger.
At the same Reynolds number, the overall heat transfer performance of a heat exchanger is evaluated using the PEC. The expression for PEC is:
(9)
Where the subscript 0 denotes the standard Gyroid structure.
2.5. Numerical setup
Turbulent flow and heat transfer within the TPMS heat exchanger are numerically simulated using ANSYS Fluent 2022R1 software with a 3D steady-state numerical simulation method. The physical model, material properties, and boundary conditions are set up. The SIMPLE algorithm in the pressure-based detached solver completes the simulation computation process. The SIMPLE algorithm is used to solve the coupled velocity-pressure equations. Momentum, energy, and turbulent kinetic energy are spatially discretized using the second-order windward format. During the calculation process, the outlet temperature of the fluid domain was monitored using the Report Definitions in Fluent, while the normalized residuals of each velocity component, momentum, and energy were maintained below 10−5. These help in obtaining the desired results and enable monitoring of computational convergence. The continuity, momentum, and energy equations are as follows [44,45]:
Continuity equation:
(10)
Momentum equation:
(11)
Energy equation:
(12)
(13)
Where u is the velocity, E is the total energy, 
, 
 and 
 correspond to thermal conductivity, turbulent thermal conductivity and effective thermal conductivity.
The shear stress transport 
 model is used to simulate turbulence effects [46]. The 
 model is mainly used to deal with the flow in the near-wall region, which combines the accuracy of the 
 model in the near-wall region with the stability of the 
 model in the far field, and can accurately predict the turbulent kinetic energy and turbulence intensity during the flow process, as well as accurately capture the velocity gradient and shear stress within the boundary layer. The swirling and secondary flows that may occur in the TPMS structure can be accurately captured. The transport equations for the turbulent kinetic energy k and the specific dissipation rate ω in the 
 model are:
(14)
(15)
3. Experimental verification
3.1. Experimental system
Experimental testing can better verify the performance of heat exchangers. The experimental system setup is shown in Fig. 7. The experimental setup consists of incubators, K-type thermocouples, temperature sensors, flowmeters, turbopumps, valves, water pumps, and differential pressure transmitters. The thermostat provides a hot fluid at a stable temperature for the experiment, while the turbine pump and water pump supply power for fluid transportation. The flowmeter (range: 5–45 L/min) is used to regulate and monitor flow, and the pressure difference is measured by a differential pressure transmitter (range: 0–100 kPa).
Fig. 7
Download: Download high-res image (352KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Schematic diagram of the experimental setup.

3.2. Comparison of experimental and simulation results
Two Gyroid structures with t of 0 mm and 1.2 mm were selected for comparison. The Gyroid structured heat exchangers were additive manufactured using the NCL-M1100 metal 3D printer with aluminum alloy powder (AlSi10Mg), followed by heat treatment. The physical parameters of this aluminum alloy are shown in Table 2. Fig. 8 shows a comparison of experimental and simulation results for the cold fluid domain 
 and 
 of two Gyroid structures under different flow rates. Temperature and pressure measurement points are located in the extension sections at the inlet and outlet to ensure accurate measurement results. During the experiment, the inlet temperature of the cold fluid is controlled within the range of 293.5–294.8K. When the inlet flow rate is 5–30 L/min, there are certain deviations between the experimental and simulation results of the two groups of Gyroid structures, among which the deviation of the Gyroid structure with t = 1.2 mm is larger. The maximum deviation of 
 is 4.2 %, and the maximum deviation of 
 is 12.9 %. The deviation between experimental and simulation results mainly stems from three factors: (a) the measurement errors of the thermocouples and flowmeters; (b) forming errors and surface roughness effects in additive manufacturing processes; and (c) heat dissipation with the surrounding environment during the experiment. In general, the experimental and numerical results have deviations within a reasonable range, which confirms the rationality of the numerical results and meets the error requirements of the heat transfer experiment.
Table 2. Physical parameters of the material [47].

Material	
Aluminum alloy	2657	880	179
Fig. 8
Download: Download high-res image (381KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Comparison of experimental and simulation results.

It is found through comparison that when there are Voronoi textures on the surface of the Gyroid structure, both To-c and 
 of the Gyroid structure increase significantly. The increase in To-c indicates that the fluid induces stronger fluid disturbance and mixing effects during the flow process, thereby effectively enhancing the heat transfer process; the increase in 
 reflects that the Voronoi textures on the surface of the Gyroid structure generate greater flow resistance to the fluid. These results demonstrate the feasibility of the research method we proposed, that is, forming textures can promote fluid mixing and improve heat transfer performance.
3.3. Accuracy and uncertainty
The key sensors used in this study for temperature, pressure, and flow rate were accurately calibrated, with their parameters shown in Table 3. For the Gyroid structure heat exchanger, the average Ra of the surface roughness on the inlet cross-sectional profile is 9.02 μm. The uncertainty of experimental measurement data can be calculated using the following formula:
(16)
Where 
. In the validation work of this study, the uncertainty of key parameters can be calculated using the above formula. The measurement results are shown in Table 4, with errors below 5 %, indicating high measurement accuracy and reliable results.
Table 3. The accuracy of the sensors used in this study.

Parameter	Measuring instrument	Accuracy	Range
Pressure	Differential pressure transmitters	
0–100 kPa
Temperature	K-type thermocouples	
273–473 
Flow rate	Flowmeters	
5–45 L/min
Table 4. Maximum uncertainties in the main parameters.

Parameter	Uncertainty (%)
h	2.1 %
Nu	4.2 %
f	4.6 %
4. Results and discussion
This section will evaluate the performance of Gyroid heat exchangers under four different t values. This evaluation will be carried out in terms of flow resistance characteristics, heat transfer performance, and comprehensive heat transfer capacity. Subsequently, the flow patterns within the four Gyroid-structured exchangers will be analyzed in detail to explain the flow mechanisms that enhance the heat transfer performance. Since water has a higher specific heat capacity than air [48], it means that the temperature change on the water side is very small. In this study, the volume fractions and hydraulic diameters of the hot water side and air side are the same. Therefore, all physical quantities used in this section are calculated from the air side perspective.
4.1. Effect of t on flow characteristics
The flow characteristics of the heat exchanger depend on its internal flow channel structure. Therefore, we will extract and compare the velocity contours, vorticity contours, and streamline diagrams of the YOZ, XOZ, and XOY cross-sections to show how Voronoi textures affect fluid flow under different t values. Fig. 9 shows the cross-sections used in the subsequent analysis. Since the positions of the cross-sections in four models are the same, only the Gyroid model with t = 0.8 mm is taken as an example for illustration.
Fig. 9
Download: Download high-res image (312KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. The cross-section extraction method for the Gyroid structure.

Fig. 10 shows the velocity contours of the cross-sections (YOZ cross-sections) perpendicular to the flow direction in the cold fluid domain of the Gyroid structure heat exchangers under different t values. In this notation, the velocity refers to the resultant velocity vector in the three directions. As shown in Fig. 10, the increase in t value has a significant impact on the fluid flow characteristics and velocity field. On the cross-sections of X = 1/3L and X = 2/3L, when t = 0 mm, the surface of the Gyroid structure is relatively smooth, and the fluid motion changes periodically with the Gyroid structure. There are few high-speed fluid regions near the wall surface. With the increase in t value, the Voronoi textures on the surface of the Gyroid structure gradually thicken, which will enhance the disturbance to the fluid near the wall. When t = 0.8 mm and t = 1.2 mm, the high-velocity regions on the entire cross-section increase significantly, which is attributed to the presence of Voronoi textures that destroy the originally smooth and continuous surface of the Gyroid structure. In the flow boundary layer, the fluid flow is controlled by viscous forces, forming a thin layer with a large velocity gradient near the wall. As t increases, the characteristics of the Voronoi textures will change the local flow direction of the fluid, causing the fluid to generate more complex flow paths and turbulent motions near the wall. This destroys the stability of the boundary layer and enables a certain degree of mixing of fluid molecules inside and outside the boundary layer.
Fig. 10
Download: Download high-res image (796KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 10. Velocity distribution of the YOZ cross-sections under different t (volume flow:15L/min).

To observe the development and changes of fluid velocity in the flow channel, Fig. 11 shows the velocity distribution contours and “through hole” schematics of the cold fluid domain of four Gyroid structure heat exchangers on the cross-sections of Y = 1/2L and Z = 1/2L along the flow direction. Due to the “through hole” characteristic of the Gyroid structure (as shown in Fig. 11(c)), the fluid tends to flow through the “through hole” with lower flow resistance. However, as the t value increases, the Voronoi texture features of the Gyroid structure become thicker, resulting in a reduction in the area of the “through hole” and an increase in the velocity of the fluid passing through the “through hole”. Meanwhile, the combined effect of the “through hole” and the textures will cause a weakening of fluid flow at local corners. Nevertheless, as observed in Fig. 11(a) and (b), on the cross-sections of Y = 1/2L and Z = 1/2L, there is an increase in local high-velocity regions and a decrease in low-velocity regions, indicating that the presence of textures plays a dominant role in fluid mixing.
Fig. 11
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 11. (a) and (b) Velocity distribution of the cold fluid on the XOZ and XOY cross-sections under different t values (volume flow:15L/min); (c) Schematic diagram of the through hole of the Gyroid structure.

As the t value increases, the Voronoi textures on the channel surface will disrupt the fluid's flow boundary layer, causing a large velocity gradient in the fluid near the wall, which in turn induces vortex motion in the fluid within the channel. Vorticity is a measure of the rotation of fluid microcluster, and the magnitude of vorticity can largely reveal the strength of fluid mixing. Therefore, a detailed study on the changes in vorticity within the channel is of great necessity. Fig. 12 show the vorticity distribution contours in the X direction of the cold fluid domain of the four Gyroid structures. From the vorticity distribution contours and the partial enlarged view of the cross-section at X = 1/3L in Fig. 12, it can be observed that all four Gyroid structures exhibit relatively significant vorticity in the boundary layer region near the wall. Since the velocity gradient in this region is more pronounced, the shear deformation of the fluid is more obvious, and the fluid mixing in the corresponding region will also be more significant. When t = 0 mm, the vorticity distributed within the cross-sectional channel is small and the fluid flows along the channel in a regular manner. However, as the t value increases, especially when t = 0.8 mm and t = 1.2 mm, not only is the vorticity level of the near-wall fluid enhanced, but also multiple localized regions of significantly enhanced vorticity level appear within the channel, and mainly around the positions where the curvature of the flow trajectory undergoes an abrupt change, which is attributed to the generation of significant velocity gradients due to the more complex textural features within the channel, resulting in the creation of a stronger vortex.
Fig. 12
Download: Download high-res image (786KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 12. Vorticity contours on the X = 1/3L cross-section of the cold fluid domain with different t values (volume flow:15L/min).

Fig. 13 shows the velocity streamline diagram and a partial enlarged view of the cold fluid domain of the Gyroid structure at the cross-section of X = 1/3L. As the t value increases, the streamlines become increasingly complex due to the disturbance of the fluid by the textures. Especially at t = 0.8 mm and t = 1.2 mm, the streamlines start to distort and complicate, generating more small-scale vortices and enhancing the vorticity level. Meanwhile, observing the local zoomed-in map one can notice that the vortices formed by the streamlines overlap with the high vorticity region of the vorticity local zoomed-in map in Fig. 12, and the negative and positive vorticity regions correspond to the opposite flow direction of the vortices in the streamline map. This phenomenon again verifies the previous analysis that the Voronoi textures enhance fluid mixing and turbulence and disrupt the flow boundary layer.
Fig. 13
Download: Download high-res image (862KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 13. Velocity streamline diagram of the X = 1/3L cross-section (volume flow:15L/min).

In conclusion, inlaying Voronoi textures on the surface of Gyroid structures changes the surface structural features thereby enhancing the heat transfer performance, which is achieved through two key mechanisms. First, as the t value increases, the thickening of the surface textures of the Gyroid structure leads to more pronounced local curvature mutations on the surface. These abrupt changes in curvature in the structure increase the fluid velocity gradient and strengthen the shear layer, thereby affecting the fluid near the wall, enhancing the turbulence and mixing of the fluid near the wall, disrupting the flow boundary layer and thermal boundary layer, and improving the convective heat transfer performance. Second, the increase in t value increases the surface area of the Gyroid structure and hence the contact area of the fluid with the wall, thereby increasing the total convective heat transfer area and enhancing the heat transfer performance.
As shown in Fig. 14(a), the relationship between the 
 and the volumetric flow rate is presented. As the volumetric flow rate increases, the Δp in the Gyroid structure exhibits a quadratic increase, which is attributed to the dominant influence of fluid inertial forces. When the volume flow rate is in the range of 5–30 L/min 
 of the improved Gyroid structure increases with the increase of t value. When t = 0.4 mm, the change in 
 relative to that at t = 0 mm is not significant, showing only a slight increase. However, when the t value increases to 0.8 mm and 1.2 mm, 
 increases significantly, which is 20.5 %–30.6 % and 55.9 %–62.2 % higher than that of the Gyroid structure with t = 0 mm, respectively. Fig. 14(b) describes the relationship between the Fanning friction factor (f) and the Reynolds number (Re) of the Gyroid structure heat exchanger. In the lower range of t values (0–0.4 mm), the increase in f also shows a slow growth. When Re is greater than 2000, the f values of the Gyroid structure heat exchangers with t = 0 mm and t = 0.4 mm are nearly the same. However, f increases significantly when t values are increased to 0.8 mm and 1.2 mm, by 9.7 %–15.2 % and 27.5 %–32.7 %, respectively, compared to the Gyroid structure at t = 0 mm, and it is clear that the increase in the texture thickness t results in stronger fluid mixing and higher wall shear stress, which in turn leads to an increase in 
 and f.
Fig. 14
Download: Download high-res image (340KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 14. 
 and f under different t values. (a) Variation of 
 with volumetric flow rate; (b) Variation of f with Reynolds number (Re).

4.2. Effect of t on heat transfer characteristics
In this section, we analyze the heat transfer characteristics of the Gyroid structure heat exchanger under different t values, including the fluid temperature and wall heat flux. The temperature distributions at the YOZ, XOZ, and XOY cross-sections are shown in Fig. 15. It can be observed from Fig. 15 that when X = 0/3L, since this is the cross-section where the cold fluid first flows into the Gyroid structure heat exchanger, the temperature distributions of the cold fluid under the four Gyroid structures are nearly the same at this point. As the cold fluid flows and exchanges heat in the Gyroid structure heat exchanger, the temperature on the cross-section perpendicular to the flow direction (YOZ cross-section) rises rapidly. With the increase of the t value, the temperature of the cold fluid at the same cross-sectional position gradually increases, and the range of high-temperature fluid in the local wall area expands, mainly appearing near the wall areas with texture features. For example, as shown in the dashed box in Fig. 15, as the t value increases, the surface textures of the Gyroid structure gradually thicken, which not only increases the convective heat transfer area between the fluid and the wall but also enhances the disturbance and mixing of the fluid. This enables sufficient diffusion of heat among the fluid, ultimately leading to an increase in fluid temperature, which is consistent with the distribution pattern of the vorticity contours in the previous section.
Fig. 15
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 15. Temperature distribution of the YOZ cross-section under different t (volume flow:15L/min).

Fig. 16 shows the distribution of wall heat flux in the cold channel of the Gyroid structure heat exchanger under different t values. It can be clearly observed from the partial enlarged view that when t = 0 mm, the high heat flux regions of the Gyroid structure only appear in the node areas. However, as the t value increases, the high heat flux regions not only exist in the node areas but also emerge in the texture feature regions, with a higher intensity of heat flux. This is mainly due to the fact that for t = 0 mm, there is no texture on the surface of the Gyroid structure, and the mixing mechanism between the fluids is that a portion of the fluid impinges head-on on the wall of the junction zone and is forced by the junction zone to change the direction of flow, and the fluid distributes from one junction to multiple fluid channels, and then mixes at the next junction with the fluid from the other fluid channels. However, as t increases, texture features appear on the surface of the Gyroid structure and become increasingly pronounced, acting as another factor that promotes fluid mixing. These texture features can disrupt the flow boundary layer and thermal boundary layer of the fluid, induce the formation of fluid vortices, and cause the hot fluid near the wall to mix with the cold fluid in the core area. This reduces the temperature of the fluid near the wall and increases the temperature difference between the near-wall fluid and the wall, enhances the normal temperature gradient of the fluid at the wall, and thereby improves the wall heat flux.
Fig. 16
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 16. Wall heat flux of the cold channel in the Gyroid structure and its partial enlarged view under different t values (volume flow:15L/min).

Fig. 17(a) shows the relationship between the Nu and the Re of the Gyroid structure heat exchanger under different t values. The Nu distributions of the four Gyroid structures exhibit an approximately linear increasing trend with the increase of Re. In the Re range of 315–2350, Nu gradually increases as the t value rises. When t = 1.2 mm, the Nu is 24.9 %–33.3 % higher than that when t = 0 mm.
Fig. 17
Download: Download high-res image (365KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 17. Nu and h under different t values. (a) Variation of Nu with Re; (b) Variation of h with volumetric flow rate.

Fig. 17(b) shows the relationship between the h of the Gyroid structure heat exchanger and the volumetric flow rate under different t values. As the volumetric flow rate increases, the h of the four Gyroid structure heat exchangers also shows a trend of approximately linear increase. With the increase of the t value, h gradually increases. When t = 1.2 mm, the h of the Gyroid structure heat exchanger is 8.6 %–14.6 % higher than that when t = 0 mm.
4.3. Comprehensive heat transfer performance evaluation
The overall performance of four Gyroid structures was evaluated using volume-based power density (VBPD) and the performance evaluation criterion (PEC). Fig. 18(a) illustrates the correlation between VBPD and pressure drop per unit length for four Gyroid-structured heat exchangers. As the pressure drop per unit length increases, the VBPD of all four Gyroid structures also rises. Notably, when the pressure drop per unit length exceeds 5600 Pa/m, the Gyroid structure with t = 0.8 mm exhibits the best volume-based power density performance.
Fig. 18
Download: Download high-res image (323KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 18. The comprehensive performance. (a)Volume-based power density (VBPD); (b) Performance evaluation criterion (PEC).

Fig. 18(b) shows the influence of t values on the comprehensive evaluation criterion (PEC) of the Gyroid structure heat exchanger. Within the range of Re varying from 315 to 2350, the PEC of the improved Gyroid structure heat exchanger first increases and then decreases. Among the three improved Gyroid structure heat exchangers, the PEC value of the one with t = 0.8 mm is the best. When Re is lower than 532, the PEC performance when t = 1.2 mm is lower than that when t = 0.4 mm. In Fig. 18(b), the PEC is calculated relative to the standard Gyroid structure. Therefore, when PEC > 1, it indicates that the overall performance of the improved Gyroid structure is superior to that of the standard Gyroid structure after comprehensively considering heat transfer and flow resistance; however, when PEC < 1, it means that the overall performance is inferior to that of the standard Gyroid structure. Hence, in practical applications, it is important to choose an appropriate t value in combination with specific application requirements and constraints to balance heat transfer efficiency and energy consumption, thereby achieving an efficient and economical thermal management scheme.
5. Conclusions
In this study, the heat transfer performance of the Gyroid structure is enhanced by inlaying a layer of Voronoi textures on its surface and controlling the thickness of the Voronoi textures by modulating the t value. Numerical analysis and experimental study of the flow and heat transfer performance of the improved Gyroid structure were carried out. Based on the analysis results, this study can draw the following conclusions:
(1)
The heat transfer enhancement mechanism of the Voronoi textures is clarified. On one hand, the textures can disrupt the flow boundary layer of the fluid, increase the vorticity of the fluid near the wall, induce vortex motion, and promote the mixing of hot fluid near the wall with cold fluid in the core region. On the other hand, the textures increase the contact area between the fluid and the wall, thereby expanding the heat exchange area and improving the heat transfer performance.
(2)
The improved Gyroid structure performs better in terms of heat transfer than the standard Gyroid structure. With the increase of the t value, the h is enhanced by 8.6 %–14.6 %, and the Nu is increased by 24.9 %–33.3 %.
(3)
As the t value increases, the h increases, and the 
 also rises accordingly. Therefore, from the perspective of comprehensive consideration of heat transfer and energy consumption, t = 0.8 mm is selected to achieve the best overall performance.
The results of this study provide new ideas for the structural optimization of TPMS heat exchangers. It mainly discusses the thermohydraulic performance of Gyroid heat exchangers within the Re range of 315–2350. The future work will further investigate the effects of high Reynolds number conditions and different Voronoi seed densities on the performance of heat exchangers, and evaluate the application potential of this method in heat exchangers with other TPMS structures.