Abstract
The thermal cycling behaviour of Advanced Ceramic Breeder (ACB) pebbles was investigated in a temperature range from 300 to 800 °C in a He + 0.1 vol% H2 gas atmosphere for up to 30 cycles. For the experiment, two batches of ACB pebbles, each with a nominal composition of 70  mol% Li4SiO4 and 30  mol% Li2TiO3 and comparable material properties, were selected. One cycle comprised 12  h at 300 °C and 12  h at 800 °C (heating rate: 10  K/min, cooling rate: ∼0.5  K/min). Different material properties were measured before the experiment and after 2, 14, and 30 cycles. Comparable to previous long-term thermal treatments, the ACB pebbles also show a good performance during thermal cycling. They remain stable with regard to their chemical and phase composition. No significant changes occur with regard to their microstructure and porosity. The mechanical stability is decreased after 2 cycles and remains stable afterwards.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Advanced ceramic breederLong-term thermal stabilityLithium orthosilicate + lithium metatitanateThermal cyclingFusion technology
1. Introduction
Biphasic pebbles consisting of lithium orthosilicate (Li4SiO4, LOS) with additions of lithium metatitanate (Li2TiO3, LMT) were developed at KIT as Advanced Ceramic Breeder (ACB) material for future fusion applications. ACB pebbles represent the European Union’s solid reference material for the ITER TBM and are also foreseen for the Helium Cooled Pebble Bed (HCPB) and the Water-cooled Lead Ceramic Breeder (WLCB) breeder blanket concepts for DEMO [1], [2].
For both European solid breeder blanket concepts, HCPB and the alternative WLCB, quite wide temperature ranges of 300/400 °C to ≥ 900 °C are anticipated [1], [2], [3]. Therefore, the investigation of the long-term thermal stability of the ceramic breeder material is essential to qualify it for use in future fusion reactors.
Previous studies on the long-term thermal stability of ACB pebbles have been performed. Different ACB compositions, including nominal 25, 30 and 35  mol% LMT, were annealed at 900 °C for up to 128  days in different gas atmospheres (He + 0.1 vol% H2 or H2O) [4]. Furthermore, samples with different lithium–6 contents (7.6, 60 and 90 at%) were annealed at 700 and 900 °C for up to 60  days in a He + 0.1 vol% H2 gas atmosphere [5]. In both previous studies it was shown that the ACB pebbles do not lose lithium at elevated temperatures, but remain chemically stable. No significant changes in the microstructure nor grain growth were observed. The open and closed porosities do not change significantly over time. With regard to the mechanical stability, a decrease in the crush load values was observed after short time in both studies and can be explained by a reordering of the structure due to a phase transformation from the cubic to the monoclinic Li2TiO3. In the following, the crush load values remain stable though [4], [5]. However, no experiments including thermal cycling had been performed for ACB pebbles.
Thermal cycling tests on Li2ZrO3 and Li2TiO3 pebbles fabricated via an extrusion-spheronisation method were performed by Lulewicz et al. [6]. Pebble beds experienced 300 cycles (15  K/s) in the temperature ranges of 170–600 °C and 350–800 °C. For both compositions, no changes in the microstructure were observed and no fragmentation occurred. For Li2TiO3 no difference in the crush load values was observed, while they decreased slightly for Li2ZrO3 [6]. Gong et al. investigated the thermal cycling behaviour of Li4SiO4 pebbles between room temperature and dwelling for 4  h at 700 °C (heating/cooling rate of 5 K/min) in up to 9 cycles [7]. To obtain Li4SiO4 pebbles, starting powders were synthesised via a sol–gel and hydrothermal route to then form pebbles by dropping a slurry into liquid nitrogen. The pebbles showed no significant changes with regard to their microstructure, grain growth or mechanical stability. It is stated that this fabrication technique is favourable for pebbles with regard to thermal cycling stability in comparison to solid-state and melt spraying methods. This is especially due to the mechanical stability that showed a more or less pronounced decrease in the crush load values for other fabrication methods. However, only 10 pebbles were measured here [7]. Li2TiO3 pebbles that were fabricated from a ceramic slurry dropped into liquid nitrogen, underwent 16 cycles between room temperature and 900 °C (heating/cooling rate of 5–15 K/min) in He + 0.1 % H2 gas atmosphere [8]. Yang et al. observed a good thermal stability with regard to the microstructure and mechanical stability [8]. The thermal cycling behaviour of biphasic pebbles consisting of Li2TiO3 and Li4SiO4 in 10 cycles between 600 and 900 °C (5 K/min) with and without compression pressure was studied by Yang et al. [9]. The pebbles were produced via an acrylamide-based sol–gel route. Some compositions showed a decrease in crush load values of ∼10 %, referred to as collapse, after thermal cycling [9], but it remains unclear how many pebbles were measured and if the decrease was within the standard deviation. Furthermore, the influence of other properties such as the different grain sizes and the formation of Li2SiO3 is not discussed in the context of a degradation in mechanical stability.
In the present study, a long-term annealing (LTA) experiment with cycling the temperature between 300 and 800 °C was performed for the first time for ACB pebbles. Although high fluctuations in temperature are not expected in the standard operation of a fusion reactor, the study was performed to obtain more information on the pebbles’ behaviour under extreme thermal conditions. Moreover, the results will help to understand the effects of a pulsed operation as it is planned in ITER.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. ACB pebble samples
ACB pebbles were produced using the KALOS process [10]. The pebbles were fabricated using the raw materials lithium hydroxide monohydrate (LiOH·H2O), silicon dioxide (SiO2), and titanium dioxide (TiO2) with ratios to result in an ACB composition with a nominal LMT content of 30 mol%. Two batches with similar material properties were selected for the LTA cycling experiment. In the following the batches will be referred to as ACB-1 and ACB-2. Furthermore, it should be noted that ACB-1 is the same batch that was used as “30–LMT–7.6” in the LTA experiment in [5] to be able to directly compare a standard LTA and an LTA including temperature cycles.
2.2. Cycling LTA experiment
The LTA cycling experiment was performed in a tube furnace with three individual alumina tubes that are heated simultaneously (see experimental setup in [5]). Helium gas including 0.1 vol% hydrogen was flowing through each tube with a flow rate of 1200 mln/h, while the gas pressure in the system was set to 1200  mbar (absolute). With a pressure slightly above the ambient pressure, the penetration of air into the system should be prevented. Humidity was monitored with moisture sensors at all gas effluent sides and at the common influent side. Optical oxygen sensors are implemented to measure the oxygen content at the influent side of tube 2 and the effluent side of all tubes.
Both ACB batches experienced the same temperature programme. This LTA experiment included a cycling of the temperature between 300 and 800 °C. Dwell times of 12 h were used at each temperature. Samples were retrieved after 2, 14, and 30 cycles (see Fig. 1). At the start of the experiment, tube 1 was loaded with the samples for 30 cycles, tube 2 with the samples for 14 cycles, and tube 3 with the samples for 2 cycles. After loading at ambient temperature, the temperature was increased to 300 °C with a heating rate of 20 K/min and in the following thermal cycling heating rates of 10 K/min were used. As the furnace does not offer active cooling, the cooling took place with a rate of about 0.5 K/min. The pebble samples were heat treated in alumina boats.

Download: Download high-res image (44KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Loading and sampling scheme of the cycling LTA experiment; c = cycles, t = tube.

2.3. Analytical methods
Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometry (ICP-OES; iCAP 7600 CUO by Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to determine the main elements lithium, silicon and titanium. A triple determination including a calibration and an internal scandium standard was performed for each sample.
The pebble samples were ground to fine powders in an agate mortar for the phase analysis using powder X-Ray Diffraction (XRD; D2 PHASER diffractometer by Bruker AXS). The measurements were performed using Cu-Kα radiation in air within a 2-theta range of 10–85°. A step width of 0.02° and the time of 1  s per step were applied for the rotating samples (15  rpm). The pristine samples were measured with a standard powder sample holder, while a silicon low background sample holder was used for the annealed samples. The following reference data was used to verify the occurring phases: Li4SiO4 (ICSD-25759, PDF-01–074-0307 [11]), mcl–Li2TiO3 (monoclinic, ICSD-15150, PDF-01–071-2348 [12]), cub–Li2TiO3 (cubic, ICSD-261235, PDF-01–080-7159 [13]).
The skeletal density of the ACB pebbles was analysed using helium pycnometry (AccuPyc® II by Micromeritics), which was then used to determine the closed porosity of the samples. Three measurements were performed for each sample. Mercury porosimetry was used (PASCAL 140/440 Evo porosimeter by Thermo Fisher Scientific) to determine the open porosity. As there are open spaces in the pebble bed that should not be included in the measurement, a pre-filling with mercury at low pressure was applied before the actual measurement. For each pristine sample, three measurements were carried out, while two measurements were performed for each cycled sample due to limited material availability.
The mechanical strength of the pebble samples was investigated in uniaxial crush load tests using a universal testing machine (zwickiLine 5 kN / Xforce HP load cell 100 N by ZwickRoell). For the tests, 40 individual pebbles were used that were screened to a diameter of 710  μm (near the maximum/primary peak of the size distribution) and to a diameter of 1000 μm, which is often used for ceramic breeder pebbles and allows the comparison with other work.
The microstructure was analysed in cross sections of the pebbles using Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM; SUPRA 55 microscope by Zeiss) with a Secondary Electron (SE) detector. Numerous pebbles were embedded in epoxy resin and ground to about half of their diameter. To improve the distinction between the two phases, the cross sections were subsequently etched with water. To obtain a conductive surface, the cross sections were sputtered with a thin layer of noble metals (Au/Pd). An acceleration voltage of 10  kV and a working distance of 10–14  mm were used for SEM images.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Experimental conditions
The recorded temperature profiles for the three furnace tubes are shown in Fig. 2. As the heating rate was relatively high, the effect of overheating was also quite high. The actual temperatures of the dwell times are in good agreement for the lower limit of 300 °C and were slightly higher than the set maximum value of 800 °C. Sampling was done at 300 °C after 2, 14, and 30 cycles (cf. scheme in Fig. 1). Considering all the heating and cooling ramps, the LTA cycling experiment lasted almost 53 days.

Download: Download high-res image (330KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Temperature profiles versus time in days (d) for the overall LTA cycling experiment (left) and for a single cycle (right) in the used furnace tubes t1, t2 and t3. Black lines on the left indicate the time of sampling after 2, 14 and 30 cycles (c).

The LTA cycling experiment was performed in a gas atmosphere with the composition of He + 0.1 vol% H2. The gas pressure was set to 1200 mbar (absolute) and remained constant during the experiment within ± 0.2 mbar. At the influent and effluent sides, the humidity and oxygen contents were constantly monitored over time. From the difference in values, the humidity- and oxygen-release from the samples was determined.
At the beginning at 300 °C, the water release was about 15,000 ppmv in all three tubes. The value dropped significantly within the first dwell time and increased again to about 14,000 ppmv due to the first heating to 800 °C. The relatively high water release at the beginning comes mainly from the humidity in the air that is in the tube before the gas atmosphere propagates in the system. Furthermore, a small amount of water from the ACB pebbles is released that was adsorbed during handling in air. Shortly before the first sampling after 2 cycles (at 3.8  days), the water release was about 880, 1425, and 1320 ppmv in the tubes 1, 2, and 3, respectively. At the end of the experiment after 30 cycles, the water release was approximately 85, 310, and 150 in the tubes 1, 2, and 3, respectively, while it should be noted that only tube 1 contained samples until the end (cf. Fig. 1).
The oxygen release was also relatively high with roughly 160,000 ppmv in all three tubes as they still contained air and the gas atmosphere was not built up yet. After 0.7  days the oxygen release dropped and the values remained very low until the end of the experiment. For example, tube 1, which contained samples until the end, showed 200 ppmv of oxygen release after 52.7  days.
3.2. Chemical and phase compositions
As it is important for tritium breeder materials that lithium does not evaporate during its operation, the lithium content was determined for the pristine samples and after 2, 14, and 30 cycles. From Fig. 3 it can be seen that the lithium content does not change over time in both samples. Hence, no lithium is lost due to a possible evaporation during the thermal cycling. In general, previous studies also showed chemical stability over time [4], [5]. In particular, for sample ACB-1 in a direct comparison, it was shown that no lithium loss occurred neither in a standard thermal treatment [5] nor within the thermal cycling (this study).

Download: Download high-res image (74KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Development of the total lithium content and its measurement inaccuracy versus the cycles for both samples.

As expected, no change in the values for silicon and titanium were observed over time. For both ACB batches, nominal LMT contents of 30  mol% were anticipated. The LMT contents were determined from the Si/Ti-ratios measured by ICP-OES. The actual LMT contents are 29.5 ± 0.3  mol% for both ACB-1 and ACB-2.
Fig. 4 shows XRD patterns comparing the pristine sample to the samples after the shortest and longest thermal cycling period. The diffraction patterns of the pristine samples exhibit the two main phases: monoclinic (mcl) Li4SiO4 and cubic (cub) Li2TiO3. The cub–Li2TiO3 phase is only metastable at temperatures below 1155 °C [14] and is formed due to the rapid cooling in the KALOS process [10]. Therefore, the thermal treatment leads to a phase transformation from cub–Li2TiO3 to mcl–Li2TiO3. This phase transition can be seen in changes of the observed reflection positions in the diffraction patterns after the thermal cycling (see Fig. 4).

Download: Download high-res image (233KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Normalised XRD patterns of ACB-1 (left) and ACB-2 (right) showing the pristine sample and the samples after the shortest (2 c) and longest cycling (30 c) period. The main reflections of the following phases are given as: Li4SiO4 (red), cub–Li2TiO3 (cyan), mcl–Li2TiO3 (blue). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

No lithium depleted phases such as Li2SiO3 were detected after 30 cycles in the diffraction patterns. Hence, the results from the phase analysis confirm those of the chemical analysis in that no significant lithium is lost during the thermal cycling.
3.3. Microstructure
The development of the microstructure of the ACB samples is shown in Fig. 5, Fig. 6. Two different types of microstructures are commonly observed in ACB pebbles [4], [5]. The first type of microstructure features large LMT dendrites that solidify first during cooling, with the LOS forming grains in the gaps between the dendrites (Fig. 5, Fig. 6, top rows). This type of microstructure is formed from a melt with a slightly higher LMT content as the melt is not perfectly homogenous during production. Within the preparation of the cross sections, they are etched with water to enhance the visibility of the LMT dendrites. However, this etching procedure makes it hard to observe the LOS grains, even though it is the main phase, as it underlies the LMT dendrites. The second characteristic microstructure shows finer LMT dendrites with LOS grains filling the gaps as can be seen in Fig. 5, Fig. 6 (bottom rows). Here, the melt had a slightly lower LMT content during production.

Download: Download high-res image (577KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Development of the two different types of microstructure exemplary for the sample ACB-1.


Download: Download high-res image (561KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Development of the two different types of microstructure exemplary for the sample ACB-2.

After different lengths of thermal cycling, the large LMT dendrites are as present as in the pristine sample. The finer LMT dendrites have a higher variety of appearance in general, but they are comparable after the thermal cycling to the ones observed in the pristine sample. The development of the grain growth is hard to investigate in both types of microstructure. The LOS grains underlie the LMT dendrites and the LMT dendrites themselves are quite variable in their crystal habits, but as far as possible, no significant grain growth was observed within the ACB samples. The grain growth is hindered as the ACB is a biphasic material with limited diffusion of silicon and titanium in the opposite phase.
The samples do not show an increase in cracks after the thermal cycling. However, it should be mentioned again that the furnace is not equipped with an active cooling, which is why the cooling rate from 800 to 300 °C was very low.
As previous studies on the long-term thermal stability have not shown any significant changes in both types of microstructures [4], [5], the current study demonstrates that even thermal cycling has no noticeable effect on the microstructure.
3.4. Porosities
The development of the closed and open porosities was investigated. Closed porosity values were determined from the skeletal densities measured using He pycnometry and the theoretical densities. The closed porosity values of the pristine sample (i.e. 0 cycles) and after the selected number of cycles are displayed in Fig. 7, left. The starting values are 1.5 ± 0.2 % and 1.2 ± 0.3 % for samples ACB-1 and ACB-2, respectively. After 30 cycles of thermal cycling, ACB-1 and ACB-2 show closed porosities of 1.8 ± 0.2 % and 1.4 ± 0.2 %, respectively. Considering measurement inaccuracy of about 1 percentage point (pp), no change in the closed porosity takes place during thermal cycling. For sample ACB-1, the values are comparable to previous studies at constant temperatures [5].

Download: Download high-res image (127KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Development of the mean closed (left) and open (right) porosities including standard deviations versus the cycles. The measurement inaccuracy is estimated to be about 1  pp.

The development of the open porosity measured using Hg porosimetry is shown in Fig. 7, right. The pristine samples, ACB-1 and ACB-2, both have an open porosity value of 2.6 ± 0.1 %. Although, the values slightly decrease and increase for samples ACB-1 and ACB-2, respectively, the values after the cycling experiment are equal or comparable to the one of the pristine samples: after 30 cycles ACB-1 has an open porosity of 2.6 ± 0.3 % and ACB-2 of 2.9 ± 0.2 %. Again, with the estimated measurement error of ∼1 pp, no change in the open porosity was observed for the thermal cycling of the samples.
3.5. Mechanical stability
To investigate the development of the mechanical stability during the thermal cycling, the crush loads of two different pebble sizes were tested. Fig. 8 shows the results for pebbles with a diameter of 710 μm and 1000 μm for the pristine samples (i.e. 0 cycles) and after each sampling period.

Download: Download high-res image (153KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Development of the mean crush load and its standard deviation versus the cycles for pebbles with Ø = 710  μm (left) and Ø = 1000  μm (right).

The mean crush load values of the pristine samples were 14 ± 5 and 15 ± 5 N (Ø = 710  μm) and 27 ± 9 and 24 ± 9 N (Ø = 1000 μm) for samples ACB-1 and ACB-2, respectively. It should be noted that the variation in the crush load values is usually relatively high, which results in high standard deviations. Nevertheless, it can be observed that the crush load values already decrease after 2 cycles and remain quite stable after further cycles. A similar decrease in crush loads after short thermal treatment times was observed in previous studies on the thermal stability [4], [5]. This behaviour can be attributed to a reordering of the crystal structure corresponding to the phase transformation from cubic to monoclinic Li2TiO3 [4 5]. The decrease in crush loads for both samples was about 52 and 43 % for the diameters of 710 and 1000  μm, respectively. From previous studies, only the pebble sizes of 1000  μm can be compared. Here, the crush load values decreased after an annealing at 900 °C by 20–30 % [4] and by 18–26 % [5]. The crush load values for samples annealed at 700 °C decreased by 25–39 % [5]. Therefore, the decrease in crush loads within the thermal cycling experiment was higher in comparison to samples annealed at a temperature of 900 °C for up to 60  days. However, the decrease in this study is comparable to the maximum decrease observed in samples that were thermally treated at 700 °C (see Fig. 9).

Download: Download high-res image (126KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Comparison of the development of crush load values and their standard deviations for sample ACB-1 (Ø = 1000 μm) in this study with thermal cycling between 300 and 800 °C to a previous study [5] annealed at temperatures of 700 and 900 °C without cycling. It should be noted that for the thermal cycling 1 day is equivalent to the dwell times within 1 cycle (12  h at 300 °C + 12  h at 800 °C).

4. Conclusions
While experiments to test the long-term thermal stability of ACB pebbles at high temperatures have been carried out in the past, no thermal cycling tests had been performed so far. This study deals with the first LTA experiment using thermal cycling between 300 and 800 °C – each temperature dwelled for 12  h – for ACB pebbles for up to 30 cycles in He + 0.1 vol% H2 gas atmosphere. Two ACB batches, both with nominal compositions of 70 mol% LOS and 30  mol% LMT and comparable material properties, were selected for the experiment. One of these samples (ACB-1) was also used in previous standard LTA tests at 700 °C and at 900 °C for up to 60 days at each temperature in a He + 0.1 vol% H2 gas atmosphere.
The LTA cycling experiment did not result in a loss of lithium and hence, the samples remain chemically stable over time. This goes along with a stable phase content of Li4SiO4 and Li2TiO3 during the thermal cycling. As expected, the thermal treatment leads to the phase transition from cubic Li2TiO3, which occurs metastably in the pristine sample due to the rapid cooling within the production process, to monoclinic Li2TiO3 that is observed after 2 cycles. The microstructures of the two samples ACB-1 and ACB-2 reveal the characteristic patterns with larger and smaller LMT dendrites and LOS that forms grains in between the gaps. During the thermal cycling, no deterioration such as intense grain growth or crack formation was observed in the microstructures. Still, it should be mentioned that thermal shocks, especially negative ones, were not very high in this study as the cooling rate was very low. The porosity values of the samples do not show significant changes within the measurement inaccuracy during thermal cycling, showing overall mean values of 1.5 ± 0.3 % and 1.4 ± 0.1 % closed porosity, along with 2.5 ± 0.2 % and 2.8 ± 0.2 % open porosity, for ACB-1 and ACB-2, respectively. The mechanical stability of the samples is represented by their mean crush load values, which decreased after 2 cycles for both samples, but remained stable during the rest of the experiment. The mean crush load values of both samples decreased by about 52 and 43 % for pebbles with diameters of 710 and 1000  μm, respectively. The phenomenon of a reduction in the crush load values after short times of heat treatment is already known from previous LTA experiments and is associated with a reordering process due to the phase transition in Li2TiO3, which results in an increase in the cell volume in the crystal structure.
The outcomes of the LTA cycling experiment were compared to previous standard LTA studies. Especially for sample ACB-1 that could be directly compared as it was used in previous LTA experiments. Comparable to standard LTA experiments, the pebbles retain their chemical stability and phase content and no significant changes in their porosities were observed. For the crush load values, it could be derived from sample ACB-1 that the usually observed decrease in crush load values appears to be less pronounced at higher constant temperatures.
Although the pebbles have to withstand a quite large temperature range (i.e. approx. 300–900 °C) in a future fusion reactor, it is not foreseen that each pebble will face such temperature variations. Although, large and frequent temperature fluctuations might not be expected unless in a pulsed operation as planned in ITER, this study provides additional information on the long-term thermal behaviour of ACB pebbles, which helps to qualify the material for its future use in the breeder blanket.