1. Introduction
Nomenclature

Empty Cell	Subscripts
T	temperature (°C)	l	liquid
ΔT	temperature difference of battery (°C)	s	solid phase of PCM
Nu	Nusselt number	Ɩ	liquid phase of PCM
Re	Reynolds number	max	maximum
Pr	Prandtl number Greek letters	inlet	liquid inlet
∇	Gradient	outlet	liquid outlet
∇2	Laplacian operator	c	liquid channel
u	velocity vector of the coolant (m/s)	b	battery
Qg	heat generated by battery (W)	θ	angle of branch
Qr	electrochemical reaction heat (W)		
Qp	joule heat (W)		
Qj	polarization heat (W)	Greek symbols
IS	current density (A/cm2)	c	specific heat capacity (J/kg·K)
Rh	ohmic internal resistance (Ω)	ρ	density (kg/m3)
Rj	internal resistance of the battery (Ω)	λ	thermal conductivity (W/m⋅K)
V	volume (m3)	μ	dynamic viscosity (Pa⋅s)
H	enthalpy of the phase change material	k	thermal conductivity
ΔH	enthalpy of the molten phase change material	γ	specific phase change enthalpy
hs	sensible heat of the phase change material	β	liquid fraction of the molten phase change material
p	pressure (Pa)		
Ac	surface area of channel (m2)		
hw	heat transfer coefficient (W/(m2.K))	Acronyms
Ql	heat carried by the coolant (W)	BFC	bionic fern-vein channel
ṁl	mass flow rate of coolant (g/s)	BFF	bionic fern-vein fin
Dc	hydraulic diameter (mm)	PCM	phase change material
J	dimensionless surface heat transfer	BTMS	battery thermal management system
F	dimensionless surface friction factor	NON-B	non-bionic
Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) possess advantages such as lightweight, high energy density, and compact structure, got extensively utilized in the field of new energy vehicles. However, the electrochemical performance and cycle life of LIBs are noticeably affected by temperature [1]. The heat generated by LIBs during discharge will lead to high temperatures and pose safety risks such as overheating, combustion and explosions [2]. Therefore, highly efficient battery thermal management system (BTMS) is crucial in the LIBs applications.
Currently, existing cooling methods of BTMS are classified based on its cooling mediums, including air cooling [3], liquid cooling [4], phase change material (PCM) cooling [5], and heat pipe cooling [6]. Air cooling has a limited cooling capacity due to its low thermal conductivity and efficiency [7]. While liquid cooling offers high heat transfer efficiency, it presents challenges such as high cost, power consumption, and significant temperature gradients within LIBs [8]. PCM provides high latent heat and good heat storage performance, promoting temperature gradients, but low thermal conductivity can lead to excessively high battery temperatures therefor limiting its application [9]. Heat pipes are less favored because of the high cost and susceptibility to damage. As the single cooling method does not meet thermal management needs, researchers studied hybrid cooling methods, such as air-liquid [10] air-PCM [11] and liquid-PCM [12]. The hybrid BTMS that combines liquid with PCM is widely studied, because combining liquid and PCM allows the complementary benefits, balancing temperature uniformity and heat transfer efficiency.
Most research on hybrid BTMS that combine liquid and PCM focuses on different arrangements of cold plate and PCM. Experimental studies have shown that the BTMS combining PCM with bottom liquid cooling, reduced the battery maximum temperature (Tmax) by 10.6 °C and the battery maximum temperature difference (ΔTmax) by 1.7 °C compared to liquid cooling [13]. Another study showed that PCM in the hybrid BTMS could temporarily store the heat when the cold plate could not promptly remove it, reducing the Tmax by 6 °C compared to liquid cooling [14], besides the ΔTmax was be reduced by approximately 44 % [15]. Similar numerical simulations of PCM/mini-channel hybrid BTMS demonstrated reductions in Tmax and ΔTmax by 22.7 % and 50 %, respectively, compared to single cooling methods [16]. The above hybrid cooling exhibited superior thermal management performance to single cooling methods. In addition, the hybrid systems optimized the cold plates using elements like Tesla valves, heat pipes, and fins to enhance BTMS performance. For instance, a BTMS combining multi-stage tesla valve liquid cooling with PCM showed the Tmax is 33.12 °C while the inlet velocity is only 0.193 m/s [17]. Another hybrid BTMS composed of the U-shaped micro heat pipe array (U-MHPA) and the cold plate filled with composite PCM was proposed, the BTMS showed better performance than liquid cooling, reducing the Tmax by 4.2 °C and the ΔTmax by 8.39 °C [18]. And the BTMS combining micro heat pipe arrays, PCM, and liquid cooling have been optimized using multi-objective particle swarm optimization based on response surface methodology, achieving a 13.78 % reduction in Tmax compared to PCM cooling [19]. Further studies on BTMS combining fins, PCM, and liquid cooling showed an optimization analysis of the PCM layout was conducted using a response surface approximation model, the result indicated Non-uniform PCM alignment reduced the ΔTmax by 26 % and the Tmax was below 32.5 °C [20]. The above methods effectively reduced the Tmax and ΔTmax of the battery. However, the convention of the cold plate, as described above, results in a restricted heat exchange area, thereby limiting its overall heat exchange capacity.
In order to address this issue, researchers have carried out studies on the cold plate structure, drawing on the application of bionic structures, such as leaf veins and animal vascular networks, which exhibit large surface areas and numerous flow channels, conducive to rapid heat transfer and dissipation. By incorporating these biological structures into BTMS, bionic structures have been developed to enhance thermal conductivity [21]. Typical bionic structures are inspired by natural forms, such as leaf veins, honeycombs, cobweb, and blood vessels. For example, a bionic leaf vein branch channel cold plate, optimized using the non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm-II (NSGA-II), the optimal parameters are (inlet flow rate) M = 0.10 m/s, (channel angle) α = 159°, (channel number) N = 15 and (channel width) D = 2.60 mm, compared with the traditional parallel straight channel ΔTmax is declined by 1.64 °C and pressure drop (ΔP) is decreased by 8.77 % respectively [22]. Similarly, Liu et al. [23] designed a BTMS combining leaf vein fins and PCM, with the topology optimization obtaining the optimal parameters (volume fractions) φ = 0.4, (wall temperatures) tw = 26 °C, and (fin thicknesses) d = 4 mm, the Tmax was reduced by 34.6 % compared to traditional rectangular fin cooling systems. Other bionic designs, such as a honeycomb-structured liquid cooling plate (HLCP) for prismatic LIBs was proposed, designed to increase the heat exchange area the result show that the optimal structural parameters are a 3 mm cooling channel width and a 6.8 mm vertical distance, with a 0.1 m/s inlet velocity, achieving the Tmax 29.35 °C and the ΔTmax 4.1 °C [21]. In addition, a novel honeycomb-like BTMS integrating a hexagonal cold plate with bionic liquid mini-channels and PCM is proposed to enhance cylindrical LIBs performance, numerical simulations reveal that, under a discharge current of 32.2 A and an inlet flow rate of 0.001 kg/s, the system stabilizes the Tmax of 35 °C and the ΔTmax of 3.8 °C with a ΔP of 11.95 Pa [24]. While, An et al. [25] proposed a capillary/honeycomb hybrid battery thermal management system (CH-HBTMS) that integrates bionic cooling channels and cellular cold plates to enhance heat dissipation and mass grouping efficiency for prismatic LIBs, the CH-HBTMS achieves a 14.11 % increase in mass grouping rate, with optimal parameters ensuring a temperature rise of only 3.38 °C and a ΔTmax of less than 2.84 °C under harsh conditions. Besides by utilizing bionic channel liquid cooling plates (BC-LCPs) and a differentiated velocity distribution strategy, combined with precisely designed bionic cobweb channels at velocities of 0.20 and 0.46 m/s, the BTMS successfully maintains the Tmax below 30.9 °C with a ΔTmax of 4.47 °C, while reducing total power consumption by 42.0 % compared to the uniform velocity strategy [26]. Another study proposes a BTMS, integrating bionic water-cooling and composite PCM, inspired by the growth mode of Nephrolepis, the results show that increasing the micro-channel's external diameter and layer number reduces the Tmax and ΔTmax, with the system maintaining a Tmax of 37.13 °C and 36.84 °C at 4C and 5C discharge rates, respectively [27]. In addition to the aforementioned biomimetic plant structures, biomimicry has also been applied to animal structure. Zhang et al. [28] optimized liquid cooling channels with bionic limulus-like fins, studied the effects of longitudinal and transverse spacing ratios between adjacent fins on the thermal performance, bionic fins showed better performance than traditional rectangular and cylindrical fins, reducing the temperature and pressure drop by 4.16 % and 54.26 %, respectively. Various studies have explored bionic structures, such as leaf veins, honeycombs, and animal vascular networks, to enhance the thermal performance of BTMS, showing significant improvements in temperature regulation and pressure drop reduction. The bionic structure focused on the comparison between hybrid cooling systems and single cooling systems, but further research is needed to compare the effectiveness and differences of various biomimetic channels and biomimetic fins in thermal management systems.
In addition, the thermal models of lithium-ion batteries can be categorized into un-coupled thermal models, coupled thermal models, and thermal abuse models, depending on the modeling principles. Among these, the un-coupled thermal model, based on Bernardi's heat generation theory, has a simple structure, making it suitable for thermal modeling of battery packs [29,30]. The coupled thermal model consists of electro-thermal coupling and electrochemical-thermal coupling models. The electro-thermal coupling model calculates the internal current distribution using a semi-empirical approach and an equivalent circuit model, which is then combined with the heat generation rate equation [31,32]. On the other hand, the electrochemical-thermal coupling model, developed by Newman et al. based on porous electrode theory, is more complex and computationally demanding [33]. The thermal abuse model, which is based on the energy conservation equation, accounts for various thermal reactions and is mainly used for simulating battery thermal runaway [34]. To mitigate the complexity and computational load of large battery packs, un-coupled thermal models are usually used for analysis.
Therefore, two novel bionic fern vein-structured were designs, these bionic structures can provide a larger heat transfer area, not only for dissipating the heat from batteries but also for exchanging heat with PCMs. As shown in Fig. 1, high-speed operation and high-rate discharge of an electric vehicle in a high-temperature environment generate significant heat, failure to dissipate the heat in time may lead to risks like combustion or explosion, therefore, it is particularly important to develop an efficient and reliable thermal management system, in order to overcome the limitations of the existing systems, the combination of biomimetic structures and PCM has great potential to provide a larger area of heat exchange area, thereby improving thermal conductivity and thermal safety, then two cold plates of bionic fern leaf vein channels (BFC) and bionic fern leaf vein fins (BFF) hybrid paraffin-based phase change materials containing alkanes were proposed, then it was compared with the single-channel structure cold plate non-bionic (NON-B) hybrid PCM, next the effects of non-bionic, bionic fern leaf vein channels and bionic fern leaf vein fins on heat transfer performance are analyzed, considering different mass flow rate, fluid inlet temperature and ambient temperature. The main study point of this study are as follows.
•
Two novel hybrid BTMS combining bionic fern leaf vein channels and bionic fern leaf vein fins with PCM are proposed. The bionic fern leaf vein channels structure can dissipate the heat generated by the battery pack under rapid discharging, showing excellent thermal performance and effectively improving thermal safety.
•The proposed bionic fern leaf vein channels structure have a large contact area and multiple branches with the PCM for good heat dissipation, which is superior to the high temperature of the single battery caused by less contact between the non-bionic cold plate and PCM.
•Adding PCM in the BTMS are proposed to significantly reduce the temperature difference of the battery pack, The PCM are capable of both storing heat and transferring excess heat to the bionic leaf vein cold plate, which is responsible for heat dissipation.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Battery discharge safety flow chart, thermal management system and parameter analysis of BTMS.

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Chapter 2 introduces the physical and mathematical models of the simulated BTMS. Numerical simulations were conducted in COMSOL Multiphysics 6.2 and the accuracy was experimentally verified. Chapter 3 compares the thermal performance and power consumption of three cold plate structures under 3 C discharge, with mass flow rate ranging from 1 g/s to 3 g/s in 0.5 g/s intervals, ambient temperatures from 20 °C to 40 °C in 5 °C intervals and fluid temperatures from 10 °C to 30 °C in 5 °C intervals. A dimensionless comprehensive evaluation factor j/f is designed to evaluate the three schemes.
2. Model description
2.1. Geometrical model
The bionic fern vein cold plate is inspired by fern leaf veins, overall schematic is shown in Fig. 2(a). The study focuses on a battery module comprising 6 series and 2 parallel IFP28148115A-52 Ah prismatic lithium-ion battery, with individual cell dimensions of 28 mm × 148 mm × 115 mm. The battery module incorporates PCM, liquid cooling channels, and thermal conductive fins. Fig. 2(b) describes the hybrid method and related dimensions of the bionic cold plate structure and PCM. The bionic fern vein structure cold plate is located at the center of the phase change material PCM. Fig. 2(c) illustrates the liquid cooling channel, with varying inlet and outlet radius (minor radius inlet aL: 1.8 mm, major radius bL: 3.6 mm, minor radius outlet aT: 3 mm, major radius bT: 6 mm), and Fig. 2(d) details the bionic fern vein cold plate structure. The vein branch structure parameters include an angle θ of 120°, length L of 10 mm, spacing W of 10 mm, and a ratio D1/D2 of 0.6. Partition plates occupy the rear 1/3 of the liquid cooling channel, and PCM surrounds the bionic vein structure, protected by a 0.25 mm aluminum shell to prevent leakage.
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (619KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of the thermal management system structure with bionic fern leaf veins: (a) overall battery pack structure; (b) cold plate parameters; (c) inlet and outlet parameters; (d) cold plate structure.

The single channel hybrid liquid cooling structure without bionics, referred to as non-bionic (NON-B) is shown in Fig. 3(a), with the average equivalent diameter DL = 6.2. Based on the above parameters, two structures were designed: the bionic fern leaf vein channel structure shown in Fig. 3(b), where the primary branches as channels connected to the fluid domain, and secondary branches as fins, referred to as Bionic fern leaf vein channels (BFC), the bionic fern leaf vein fin structure shown in Fig. 3(c), where both primary and secondary branches are fins connected to the fluid domain, referred to as Bionic fern leaf vein fins (BFF).
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (452KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Schematic diagrams of three structures.

2.2. Governing equations
The battery thermal management system consists of four parts: the battery, the cold plate, the coolant, and the PCM. The heat generated by the electrochemical reaction is transferred from the battery to the phase change material, which absorbs the heat and then transfers the accumulated heat to the cold plate, and the coolant carries away the heat from the cold plate. Assuming that the density and heat capacity of the battery are uniform, and the thermal conductivity is uniform. The energy conservation equation in the battery is expressed as (1) [35]:
(1)
Where 
 is time, 
 is the density of the battery, 
 is the specific heat capacity of the battery, 
 is the temperature of the battery, 
 is the thermal conductivity of the battery, and 
 is the heat generated by the battery.
The heat generated by the Lithium-ion battery can be divided into four parts: electrochemical reaction heat 
, Joule heat 
, polarization heat 
, and decomposition heat 
, where the decomposition heat is relatively small and can be neglected. Therefore, the total heat 
 can be expressed as (2–7) [36,37]:
(2)
The heat generation of the electrochemical reaction can be expressed as:
(3)
Where 
 is temperature (°C); 
 is current density (A/cm2); 
 is the temperature coefficient in the reaction process.
The heat generation of Joule heating can be expressed as:
(4)
Where, 
 is the current during charge and discharge (A); 
 is the ohmic internal resistance (Ω).
The heat generation of polarization heat can be expressed as:
(5)
Where 
 is the charge and discharge current (A); 
 is the internal resistance of the battery (Ω).
Therefore, the total heat generation of the battery can be expressed as:
(6)
However, since the heat conductivity of the components of a lithium-ion battery is quite high in relation to the heat generated, one can in many cases assume the battery to have a fairly uniform temperature profile and constant and neglecting the influence of battery tab temperature, based on Joule's law, the irreversible heat caused by the voltage difference between the open-circuit voltage and the terminal voltage is replaced by the relationship between the current and the equivalent internal resistance [38]. The heat generation rate of the battery can be expressed as:
(7)
Where 
 is the discharge current (A); 
 is the battery volume (m3); 
 is the initial temperature of the battery (K); 
 is the temperature coefficient of the battery, a constant; 
 is the equivalent internal resistance of the battery (Ω).
To establish the mathematical model of mass, momentum, and energy conservation of the coolant in the battery thermal management system, the following assumptions are proposed.
(1)
The fluid is incompressible, that the density remains constant.
(2)
The properties of the fluid are constant.
(3)
The fluid is uniformly distributed in the microchannel without lateral or longitudinal non-uniformities.
(4)
The effect of the gravitational field can be neglected.
(5)
There is no slip between the fluid and the microchannel wall, that the friction between the fluid and the wall can be ignored.
The relevant control equations are simplified as follows (8–10) [39,40]:
(8)
(9)
(10)
Where 
 is the density of the coolant; 
 is time; 
 is the velocity vector of the coolant; 
 is the specific heat capacity of the coolant; 
 is the temperature of the coolant; 
 is the thermal conductivity of the coolant; 
 is the static pressure of the coolant; 
 is the dynamic viscosity of the coolant.
To establish the mathematical model of mass, momentum, and energy conservation of the PCM in the battery thermal management system, the following assumptions are proposed.
(1)
The physical properties of each phase of the PCM are constant.
(2)
The PCM in the liquid phase is incompressible and Newtonian.
(3)
The material inside the PCM is homogeneous, and the thermal conductivity is the same in all three directions.
(4)
The volume change of the PCM during the phase change process is neglected.
The heat transfer inside the PCM is divided into sensible heat and latent heat, and the energy equation is specified as follows [41]:
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
Where 
 is the bulk density of phase change material; 
 is the thermal conductivity of the phase change material; 
 is the enthalpy of the phase change material; 
 is the sensible heat of the phase change material; 
 is the enthalpy of the molten phase change material; 
 is the liquid fraction of the molten phase change material; 
 is the specific phase change enthalpy; 
 is the freezing point temperature; 
 represents the melting point temperature.
2.3. Performance parameters
To describe the performance of the cold plate, the pressure loss and heat transfer coefficient are defined as shown in Eq. 16–18 [42], representing the flow resistance and heat dissipation capacity of the coolant, respectively.
(16)
(17)
Where 
 is the coolant pressure inlet, 
 is the coolant pressure outlet, equal to the ambient pressure, 
 is the heat carried by the coolant, 
 is the highest temperature of the battery, 
 is the temperature of the inlet coolant, 
 is the temperature of the outlet coolant, 
 is the channel surface area, and 
 is the coolant mass flow rate.
In addition, to describe the comprehensive performance of the cold plate, the j/f factor is used as a dimensionless factor. The factor J represents the dimensionless surface heat transfer. The factor F is the dimensionless surface friction factor, reflecting the flow resistance inside the channel. Finally, the relevant equations are expressed as follows Eq. 19–23 [43]:
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
(23)
Where 
 is the Nusselt number, 
 is the Reynolds number, 
 is the inlet velocity of the coolant, 
 is the hydraulic diameter, 
 is the channel inlet area, and 
 is the channel inlet perimeter, Pr is the Prandtl number, related to the coolant. In this work, the Prandtl number of waters is 6.22 [44], and 
 is the total length of the channel.
2.4. Numerical model
The modeling and simulation was performed using COMSOL Multiphysics 6.2. The specific boundary conditions of the model are as follows: coolant inlet temperature is set to 25 °C, and the initial temperatures of the coolant, PCM, and battery are set to the ambient temperature of 35 °C. C-rate is ratio of the charge/discharge current to the nominal capacity of the battery and the discharge rate is 3 C (I = 156 A). Natural convection heat transfer conditions are applied to the battery module's outer surface with a convective heat transfer coefficient of 5 W/(m2·K). Internal contact thermal resistance is neglected, with aluminum used for the channel and PCM casing, and water as the coolant. Given the maximum Reynolds number (Re = 924) in the channel is less than 2300, incompressible model in laminar flow model is adopted and the maximum value of y+ is 1.16 at the maximum Reynolds numbers. The inlet is a velocity inlet with an initial flow velocity of 0.1 m/s, and the outlet uses pressure outlet boundary conditions. The channel surface is set as a no-slip boundary to simplify the model and accurately describe flow characteristics. The article adopts GOTION HIGH-TECH IFP28148115-52Ah battery [45], the parameters of battery thermal management system is listed in Table 1 [46,47]. The PCM is a paraffin-based alkane material from Guangzhou Zhongjia New Material Technology Co., Ltd [48], with specific parameters as shown in Table 2.
Table 1. Battery thermal management system parameters.

Type	Parameters	Details
Battery	Size	28 mm∗148 mm∗115 mm
Cathode	Lithium iron phosphate
Anode	Graphite
Battery case	Aluminum
Weight	950 g
Nominal voltage	3.2 V
Rated capacity	52 Ah
Operating voltage	2.0 V–3.65 V
Energy density	180 Wh/kg
Optimal discharge temperature range	10 °C–35 °C
Optimal charging temperature range	10 °C–35 °C
Density	2198.3 kg/m3
Heat capacity	1192.1 J/(kg·K)
Thermal conductivity (X,Y)	55.5 W/(m·K)
Thermal conductivity (Z)	0.85 W/(m·K)
Cold plate	Material	Aluminum
Thermal conductivity of plate	202 W/(m·K)
Specific heat capacity of plate	871 J/(kg·K)
Density of plate	2719 kg/m3
Coolant	Material	Water
Ambient temperature	25 °C
Dynamic viscosity of coolant	0.89 × 10−3 Pa s
Thermal conductivity of coolant	0.609 W/(m·K)
Specific heat capacity of coolant	4128 J/(kg·K)
Density of coolant	998.2 kg/m3
Table 2. Thermal properties of PCM.

Parameters	Details
Density of PCM	840 kg/m3
Specific heat capacity of PCM	2000 J/(kg·K)
Thermal conductivity of PCM	0.21 W/(m·K)
Dynamic viscosity	8.12 × 10−3 Pa s
Latent heat of PCM	215 kJ/kg
Phase change temperature of PCM	37 °C
2.5. Model verification
In COMSOL Multiphysics 6.2, the imported battery pack geometric model is meshed. Firstly, the prismatic lithium-ion battery is divided into hexahedral grids by sweeping the free quadrilateral surface grids. Then, the cold plate and fins are divided by free tetrahedral mesh, the boundary layer conditions are added to the fluid domain and the free tetrahedral grids is used for division. In order to better capture the physical field information near the cold plate wall, the grid of the boundary layer on the cold plate wall is refined by encryption, and the model grid division structure is shown in Fig. 4.
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. The mesh model of the battery thermal management system.

Based on the above assumptions, initial conditions and boundary conditions, the model was analyzed for grid and step independence to ensure the simulation accuracy. The variation trends of Tmax and ΔTmax with increasing grid number and step size are depicted in Fig. 5. The Tmax and ΔTmax rapidly increase with the number of grids, stabilizing at 2,831,095 grids as shown in Fig. 5(a). To ensure simulation accuracy and save calculation time, 2,831,095 grids are used. Next, time step independence is tested by comparing simulation results at 1 s, 10 s, 20 s, 30 s, 35 s, and 40 s. The Tmax and ΔTmax deviations across time steps are 0.048 °C and 0.021 °C, respectively, all within acceptable error ranges was shown in Fig. 5(b). Reducing the time step from 20 s to 1 s increases calculation time from 70 to 146 min. Thus, the time step for all simulations is set at 20 s.
Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (327KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Independences for the grid number and the time step.

To verify the model's accuracy, the simulation results are compared with experimental data and results from Fen Liu et al. [23] under the ambient temperature 30 °C and 4 C discharge. The temperature rise results of the battery are shown in Fig. 6, the relative error between the simulation data and experimental data is consistently within 0.27 °C, with a mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) of 0.11 °C, all within acceptable error ranges, validating the reliability of the battery model used in this paper.
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (214KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. The temperature change curve of the battery at 30 °C and 4 C discharge rate.

3. Results and discussion
3.1. Effects of mass flow rate
The coolant mass flow rate affects the Tmax of the battery. The boundary conditions used in this section include ambient temperature at 35 °C and fluid inlet temperature at 25 °C. The variation of the Tmax and liquid phase rate are shown in Fig. 7 at different mass flow rate. NON-B1 denotes a mass flow rate of 1 g/s under the NON-B structure, and so forth. Fig. 7(a) illustrates the variation of Tmax over time under different cold plate at various mass flow rates, showing that initially Tmax rises rapidly and then the rate of increase slows down over time, with the NON-B exhibiting a higher temperature compared to the BFF, while the BFC maintains the lowest Tmax.
Fig. 7
Download: Download high-res image (509KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. The Tmax and maximum liquid phase rate of BFC, BFF, and NON-B at different mass flow rate.

Fig. 7(b) presents the variation of the maximum liquid phase rate over time under different cold plate structures at different mass flow rate. During the initial discharge (0 < t < 300 s), the liquid phase rate of the BFC first increases and then decreases, because the temperature gradient of the battery is relatively small in the initial stage of discharge, and the fluid in the branch channel of the BFC does not undergo local natural convection heat transfer. Consequently, heat accumulates in the PCM, causing a localized increase in the liquid phase rate, which initially rises rapidly and then increases slowly over time. The liquid phase rate of NON-B is higher than that of BFF, while BFC has the lowest rate, indicating its superior thermal management potential compared to the NON-B and BFF.
The temperature distribution contours of the battery under the thermal management of three cold plate structures at a mass flow rate of 2.5 g/s are shown in Fig. 8. Temperature profiles along the dashed line in Fig. 8 are collected, with the highest and lowest temperatures marked. The temperature distribution contours indicates that Tmax occurs at the vertex of the cross-section. As shown in Fig. 8, the BFF and BFC demonstrate effective temperature control, with BFC exhibiting superior performance.
Fig. 8
Download: Download high-res image (1002KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Temperature distribution contours of different cold plate structures at a mass flow rate of 2.5 g/s.

The Tmax and ΔTmax of the battery pack under varying mass flow rate are depicted in Fig. 9. As show in Fig. 9(a), with increasing mass flow rate, the Tmax decreases by 0.1 %, 1.5 %, and 0.25 %, respectively under NON-B, BFC, and BFF thermal management, indicating that mass flow rate has a minimal impact on NON-B and BFF, but significant impact on BFC, meanwhile the Tmax under BFC and BFF is lower than that under the NON-B, with reductions up to 2.1 % and 1.3 %, respectively. The BFC achieves the lowest Tmax of 38.95 °C at mass flow rate of 2 g/s. As show in Fig. 9(b), the ΔTmax under BFC and BFF is consistently higher than that NON-B. Within the range of 1–2 g/s, the ΔTmax for BFF is slightly lower than BFC, whereas BFF exhibits a higher ΔTmax than BFC in the range of 2.5–3 g/s. As mass flow rate increases, the ΔTmax under NON-B initially rises slowly and then decreases, reaching a minimum value of 2.29 °C at 3 g/s. For BFC and BFF structures, the ΔTmax initially increases, then decreases and increases again with mass flow rate, achieving the smallest differences of 3.03 °C and 3.07 °C, respectively, at 2.5 g/s.
Fig. 9
Download: Download high-res image (326KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. The Tmax and ΔTmax of BFC, BFF, and NON-B at different mass flow rate.

The influence of mass flow rate on the performance of NON-B, BFC, and BFF is show in Fig. 10. The pressure drop for BFF and NON-B increase with the mass flow rate, reaching maximum values of 17.5 Pa and 31.99 Pa at 3 g/s, respectively (Fig. 10(a)). In contrast, the pressure drop for BFC initially rises and then decreases with increasing flow rate, exhibiting the lowest pressure drop within the range of 2.5 g/s to 3 g/s, indicating its lowest power consumption. Fig. 10(b) illustrates the comparison of heat transfer capacity for NON-B, BFC, and BFF at varying mass flow rate. At mass flow rate of 2.5 g/s, the peak heat transfer capacity for the BFC is about 0.028 kJ, which is increase of 100 % and 330 % compared to BFF and NON-B, respectively. These findings reveal that BFC consistently achieves higher heat transfer capacity compared to BFF and NON-B at all mass flow rate. The comparison of Nusselt numbers (Nu) for the three cold plate structures under different mass flow rates is shown in Fig. 10(c). The Nu at the BFC is approximately 0.284 at a mass flow rate of 2.5 g/s, compared to BFF, NON-B increase 77 %, 162 %, respectively, indicating that BFC maintains higher Nu compared to BFF and NON-B at all mass flow rate. The j/f factors of the three cold plate structures are compared at different mass flow rates, as shown in Fig. 10(d). As the mass flow rate increases, the j/f factors of three cold plate structures tend to decrease, with BFC reaching its maximum value of 5.7 at 2.5 g/s, demonstrating superior overall performance at this specific mass flow rate.
Fig. 10
Download: Download high-res image (571KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 10. Influence of mass flow rate on the performance of BFC, BFF, and NON-B: (a) Pressure drop; (b) Heat transfer capacity; (c) Nu; (d) j/f factor.

3.2. Effects of fluid inlet temperature
The fluid inlet temperature has an impact on the temperature uniformity of the battery. The boundary conditions used in this section are 35 °C ambient temperature and 2.5 g/s mass flow rate. The influence of various fluid inlet temperatures on the Tmax of the battery for BFC, BFF, and NON-B is shown in Fig. 11. NON-B10 indicates the NON-B structure with a fluid inlet temperature of 10 °C, and so forth. The Tmax rises rapidly at first and then increases more gradually over time. The minimum Tmax observed for BFC10, BFF10, BFC15, and BFF15 are 33.76 °C, 32.69 °C, 35.86 °C, and 35.15 °C, respectively.
Fig. 11
Download: Download high-res image (404KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 11. The Tmax of BFC, BFF, and NON-B at different fluid inlet temperatures.

The temperature profile contours of the battery at varying fluid inlet temperatures are presented in Fig. 12, the profile position is the same as Fig. 8. The temperature profile contours indicate that the Tmax is primarily concentrated at the top, bottom, and the left and right extremities of the battery. The surface temperature of the battery near the flow channels is lower due to enhanced heat transfer in these regions. As the fluid inlet temperature increases, the disparity in Tmax between BFC and BFF relative to NON-B diminishes. The BFF and BFC demonstrate superior temperature control capabilities compared to the NON-B, with BFC exhibiting the best performance.
Fig. 12
Download: Download high-res image (2MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 12
Download: Download high-res image (1010KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 12. Temperature profile contours of battery at different fluid inlet temperatures.

The comparison of Tmax and ΔTmax for the battery pack under the three cold plate structures at different fluid inlet temperatures is shown in Fig. 13. The Tmax in three cold plate structures increases due to the fluid's reduced heat dissipation capability, as the fluid inlet temperature rises. The Tmax for the BFC and BFF remains lower than that of the NON-B, and the Tmax for the BFC, BFF, and NON-B are 38.98 °C, 39.76 °C, and 39.33 °C, respectively, at fluid inlet temperature of 30 °C. Besides the ΔTmax for the BFC, BFF, and NON-B gradually decreases, with the ΔTmax is smaller for the BFC and NON-B compared to the BFF. At fluid inlet temperature of 30 °C, the ΔTmax achieved by the BFC, BFF, and NON-B are 2.3 °C, 2.03 °C, and 1.69 °C, respectively. These findings the impact of fluid inlet temperature on the thermal performance of the battery, three cold plates can satisfy the Tmax and ΔTmax requirements under different fluid inlet temperature conditions.
Fig. 13
Download: Download high-res image (331KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 13. The Tmax and ΔTmax of BFC, BFF, and NON-B at different fluid inlet temperatures.

The effect of fluid inlet temperature on the performance of NON-B, BFC, and BFF is shown in Fig. 14. The investigation compares pressure drops for NON-B, BFC and BFF, and establishes that the pressure drops for the three cold plate structures remain relatively stable at different fluid inlet temperatures, with specific values of 11.68 Pa, 27.1 Pa and 14.54 Pa, respectively (Fig. 14(a)). As shown in Fig. 14(b), the BFC exhibits a higher heat transfer capacity than the BFF and NON-B. The heat transfer rate of three cold plate structures shows a downward trend as fluid inlet temperature increases BFC and BFF increase by 325 % and 90 %, respectively, compared to NON-B at 25 °C. The Nu of the three cold plate structures shows a downward trend, and the Nu of BFC and BFF increase by 154 % and 30 %, respectively, compared with NON-B at 25 °C. The j/f factor of BFC is higher than those of BFF and NON-B, and the j/f factor of NON-B, BFC, and BFF decrease, while that of BFC shows a significant drop about 50 % at fluid inlet temperature of 30 °C as fluid inlet temperature rises (Fig. 13(d)). At 25 °C, the j/f factor of BFC increased by 357 % and 371 %, respectively, compared to BFF and NON-B, indicating that the BFC exhibits superior overall performance.
Fig. 14
Download: Download high-res image (590KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 14. Influence of fluid inlet temperature on the performance of BFC, BFF, and NON-B: (a) Pressure drop; (b) Heat transfer capacity; (c) Nu; (d) j/f factor.

3.3. Effects of ambient temperature
In practical applications, batteries may operate under different ambient temperatures. High temperatures can lead to thermal runaway of batteries [49] while low temperatures can reduce battery performance [50]. Therefore, this section investigate the impact of ambient temperature on the thermal performance of BFC, BFF, and NON-B, under varying the ambient temperature from 20 °C to 40 °C in increments of 5 °C. The boundary conditions are fluid inlet temperature of 25 °C and mass flow rate of 2.5 g/s. Fig. 15 shows the Tmax and ΔTmax with three cold plate structures under various ambient temperatures. As the ambient temperature increases, the Tmax of three cold plate structures gradually increases due to the reduced heat dissipation capability of the coolant (Fig. 15(a)). The Tmax of the BFC is lower than that of the BFF and NON-B. At ambient temperature of 40 °C, the Tmax of the BFC and BFF is reduced by 8 % and 6 %, respectively, compared to the NON-B. As shown in Fig. 15(b), the ΔTmax in the BFC and NON-B firstly decreases and then increases as the ambient temperature rises, while the BFF exhibits a fluctuating increase. Under the high-temperature, the ΔTmax of the BFF reaches 4.66 °C, indicating significant temperature variations. In contrast, the ΔTmax of the BFC remains relatively stable at around 3.2 °C, demonstrating more stable temperature control performance. The NON-B shows a smaller ΔTmax under low-temperature conditions, but this increases to 3.43 °C under high-temperature conditions.
Fig. 15
Download: Download high-res image (330KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 15. The Tmax and ΔTmax of BFC, BFF, and NON-B at different ambient temperatures.

The influence of ambient temperature on the thermal performance is shown in Fig. 16. The pressure drop in the BFC is lower than in the BFF and NON-B, and the pressure drop for three structures decreases (Fig. 16(a)) and the data indicate an upward trend in heat transfer capacity for three cold plate structures (Fig. 16(b)) as the ambient temperature rises. The heat transfer capacity of the BFC attains a peak of 0.031 kJ, which is 68 % and 110 % higher than that of the BFF and NON-B, respectively, underscoring its exceptional heat transfer performance at ambient temperature of 40 °C. The Nu of BFC increases significantly, while the increments of BFF and NON-B are small, and at ambient temperature of 40 °C, the Nu of BFC is 68.3 % and 67.1 % higher than that BFF and NON-B, which indicates that the BFC has the strongest heat transfer performance (Fig. 16(c)). As shown in Fig. 16(d), the j/f factor of three cold plate structures increases as the ambient temperature rises, and the j/f factor of the BFC increase by 390 % and 396 % compared to the BFF and NON-B under the ambient temperature 35 °C, respectively. The results show that BFC exhibits the best overall performance, because BFC has more branch channel heat that can be quickly taken away by the fluid, and the power consumption generated by natural convection is smaller.
Fig. 16
Download: Download high-res image (644KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 16. Influence of ambient temperature on the performance of BFC, BFF, and NON-B: (a) Pressure drop; (b) Heat transfer capacity; (c) Nu; (d) j/f factor.

4. Conclusion
Two types of cold plates (BFC and BFF) were proposed and coupled with paraffin-based alkane phase change materials. Which were applied to the BTMS of prismatic lithium-ion battery in this study. At 3 C discharge rate, the effects of mass flow rate (1 g/s ∼ 3 g/s interval 0.5 g/s), fluid inlet temperature (10 °C ∼ 30 °C interval 5 °C) and ambient temperature (20 °C ∼ 40 °C interval 5 °C) on the performance of BFC, BFF and NON-B were studied. The conclusions are as follows.
•The Tmax of BFC (40.71 °C) and BFF (41.26 °C) are lower than that of NON-B (44.12 °C), and the maximum reductions 7.7 % and 6.5 %, respectively. The results demonstrate that the BTMS with the BFC can control the Tmax of the battery pack more effectively.
•The pressure drops for BFC (14.2 Pa) and BFF (21.6 Pa) are reduced by 57.1 % and 52.2 % compared to NON-B (33.1 Pa), indicating that the BFC cold plate is more energy-efficient.
•The dimensionless factor j/f is proposed to evaluate the performance of the BTMS. Compared to BFF (1.19 Pa) and NON-B (1.17 Pa), the j/f factor for BFC (5.82 Pa) increases by 390 % and 396 %, respectively, indicating that the BFC cold plate outperforms the BFF and NON-B in terms of heat transfer and flow resistance.
In summary, the BFC has the best thermal management performance. It can reduce the Tmax and decrease pressure drop more effectively, providing a new idea for the structure of the cold plate.