Abstract
The loop heat pipe (LHP) is a highly efficient heat transfer device, widely used in areas such as aerospace, energy, and electronic thermal management. Thermal performance of LHP is influenced by various parameters, especially wick pore topology, wick geometry, and operational parameters, while the corresponding design criteria are still absent. The prediction and a priori design of the LHPs entail a profound understanding of the vapor-liquid behaviors within the system. However, either due to the lack of non-invasive visualization experimental methods or efficient mathematical models for phase capture, there are still debates surrounding the conditions and characteristics of the two-phase thermodynamic field within the porous wick. In this study, a two-dimensional transient mathematical model of the wick in a loop heat pipe is proposed, which incorporates the Schrage evaporation model into a robust phase-capture method. A five-layer iterative algorithm is then established to derive the corresponding numerical solutions. The numerical method is fully validated by previous experimental results. Additionally, the effects of capillary force, permeability, and adverse gravitational pressure drop on the wick's operating temperature are thoroughly analyzed. This model suggests the thermodynamic status within the wick can be divided into three distinct states: full-liquid, partial recession, and dry-out. A bi-porous wick, implemented by small metal powders (MP, <2 μm), large pore-forming agent (PFA, >16 μm) diameters and an appropriate PFA-MP volume ratio (20 %∼30 %), can maintain a large permeability with slightly reduced capillary force. Thus, it holds promise for achieving low thermal resistance.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Loop heat pipePorous mediaLiquid-vapor interfaceMathematical modeling
Nomenclature	Subscripts or superscripts
A	the cross-sectional area (m2)	0	initial state
a	accommodation coefficient	c	capillary
c	specific heat capacity, (J/(kg·K))	bi	bi-porous wick
D	pore-forming agent diameter, (m)	f	fluid
d	diameter of metal powder, (m)	g	vapor
e	internal energy, (J/kg)	l	liquid
h	enthalpy, (J/kg)	lg	liquid-vapor difference
i	grid index in the z direction	max	maximum
j	grid index in the r direction	mono	mono-porous wick
K	permeability, (m2)	out	outlet
k	thermal conductivity, (W/(m·K))	r	on radial direction
l	length, (m)	s	phase interface
p	pressure, (Pa)	sat	saturation condition
q	heat flux, (W/m2)	t	total
r	the radius of the wick, (m)	in	inlet
T	temperature, (K)	w	solid
t	time, (s)	z	on axial direction
V	velocity, (m/s)	δ	sealing clearance
z	axial position, (m)	-	negative side
Greek symbol	+	position side
βp	expansion coefficient with constant pressure, (1/Pa)	^	round down
βT	expansion coefficient with constant temperature, (1/K)		
δ	the width of the sealing clearance, (m)		
ε	the proportion of pore-forming agent		
μ	dynamic viscosity, (kg/(m·s))		
υ	kinematic viscosity, (m2/s)		
ρ	density, (kg/m3)		
σ	coefficient of surface tension, (N/m)		
ϕ	porosity		
1. Introduction
The loop heat pipe (LHP) [1] is a capillary-driven two-phase thermal management device which enables effective heat transfer without active power consumption. Since its development by Maydanik in 1985, the LHP has been extensively utilized in space applications due to its high efficiency, passive operation, anti-gravity capabilities and vibration-free characteristics. In recent years, LHPs have found widespread applications in areas such as aerospace [2,3], energy systems [4], and electronic thermal management [5,6].
An LHP comprises five main components: the evaporator, condenser, compensation chamber, vapor line, and liquid line. Research on LHPs falls into two primary categories. The first focuses on system-level studies [[7], [8], [9], [10]]. As reviewed by Stéphane et al. [8], these studies indicate that the system's thermodynamic performance is influenced by multiple variables, including material-related properties such as wick permeability and fluid viscosity, operational conditions such as saturation temperature and input heat flux, and design parameters such as liquid filling ratios and wick size. Bai et al. [9] develop a steady-state one-dimensional mathematical model of an LHP. Based on the model, the effects of factors such as heat sink temperature, ambient temperature, and adverse elevation on LHP operation are clarified. Additionally, this study conducts a comparative analysis between single-layer and dual-layer composite wicks. As noted by Siedel et al. [11] in 2015, since the phenomenon of wick dry-out is rarely accounted for in existing models, significant discrepancies often arise between numerical and experimental results. A precise theoretical description of LHPs is imperative, which relies on a deeper insight into the transient vapor-liquid behavior within the wick.
The second category focuses on individual components of the LHP, particularly on the wick of the evaporator. Experimental studies in this category typically utilize advanced visualization technologies, such as infrared imaging. Kumar et al. [12] obtained the phase interface under different heat flux by identifying the interface location based on saturation temperature. As the heat flux increases, the area where the vapor-liquid interface recedes into the wick becomes larger. Similarly, Kimihide et al. [13] observe the evolution of phase interface in response to different heat loads. Meanwhile, a degradation of the device-level performance under high heat flux conditions is reported. Such degradation is speculated to be caused by the vapor invasion into the wick, which increases effective thermal resistance of the wick and thereby impairs the overall performance of the LHP [[13], [14], [15]]. However, quantitative correlations between the thermal performance and the corresponding vapor-liquid interface position within the wick are still absent.
Numerical simulation thus stands out as a promising alternative for gaining a deeper understanding of the vapor-liquid behavior within the wick. Promising numerical methods include lattice Boltzmann method (LBM) [16,17], pore network model (PNM) [18,19], and continuum model [20,21]. Among them, the lattice Boltzmann method and pore network model are more suitable for analyzing the pore-scale characteristics of the wick. In contrast, the continuum model is most widely used for investigating the macroscopic behavior within the wick.
Continuum models in this area can be broadly categorized into steady-state [18,22] and transient [21,23] approaches. A common challenge in capturing the two-phase behavior within a continuum framework lies in establishing a feasible phase-tracking method. Prior studies have proposed several thought-provoking methods to address this challenge. However, most of them rely on physically unrealistic assumptions. For instance, some models [24,25] assume that the phase boundary is fixed at the wick outer surface, which conflicts with relevant experimental studies. The phase boundaries in Demidov's [22] and Cao's [23] models, although not fixed, are assumed to follow specific contours in the form of circular arcs or straight lines, respectively. Another model by Kaya et al. [20] speculates that the phase boundary coincides with a specific isothermal line, whose validation is under debate, especially in transient scenarios.
Conversely, a pioneering work by Ren et al. [21] claims that these unverified assumptions are unnecessary for effective phase boundary tracking within the wick. Instead, Ren emphasizes the importance of ensuring energy and mass conservation across the interface. The possible deficiency in Ren's model [21] is the decoupling of the evaporation rate at the phase interface is deemed independent of local temperature and pressure, which violates phase change theorems, such as Schrage model [26]. To be specific, the renowned Schrage model in mesoscopic evaporation analysis claims a close relationship between the evaporation rate and local thermodynamic properties, yet it is seldom [27,28] employed in the macroscopic modeling of LHPs. Due to the lack of an appropriate evaporation model, the phase boundary captured by Ren's model deviates significantly from previous experimental results. Table 1 summarizes the comparisons of various wick simulation studies.
Table 1. Comparative study on wick simulation.

Empty Cell	Method Classific-ation	Transient or Not	Model Dimension	Assumption at the interface	Correlation between evaporation rate and local temperature or pressure	Scope
Li et al. [16]	LBM	Yes	3D	No Special Assumption	–	Mesoscopic
L. Mottet et al. [18]	PNM	No	3D	Coincidence with an Isothermal Line	No Correlation	Mesoscopic
Kaya et al. [20]	Continuum Model	No	2D	Coincidence with an Isothermal Line	No Correlation	Macroscopic
Ren et al. [21]	Continuum Model	Yes	2D	No Special Assumption	No Correlation	Macroscopic
Cao et al. [23]	Continuum Model	Yes	3D	With a Specific Contour of Straight Lines	Silver& Simpson Model	Macroscopic
Zhang et al. [24]	Continuum Model	No	3D	Fixed at the outer surface	No Correlation	Macroscopic
Li et al. [25]	Continuum Model	No	3D	Fixed at the outer surface	No Correlation	Macroscopic
A.S.DEMIDOV et al. [22]	Continuum Model	No	2D	With a Specific Contour of Circular Arc	No Correlation	Macroscopic
Our model	Continuum Model	Yes	2D	No Special Assumption	Schrage Model	Macroscopic
The present mathematical model, developed based on the governing equations proposed by Ren et al. [21], incorporates a mass discontinuity term across the phase interface via the Schrage model [26]. This formulation is commonly applied in evaluating the mesoscopic evaporation rate in porous media [23] and other thin-film evaporation scenarios [29,30]. While its use in continuum modeling of LHP is limited, its applicability in other macroscopic two-phase systems has been confirmed by recent studies [27,28,31] in various fields. Afterwards, a new numerical algorithm, tailored for the differential equation sets in this study with a moving boundary, is implemented through a custom-built program. The mathematical model and its numerical algorithm are respectively presented in Section 2 and Section 3. Based on the model, three distinct working mechanisms of the fluid within porous wick, together with their thermodynamic characteristics, are revealed. The effects of key parameters—including the wick's physical properties, such as capillary pressure and permeability, as well as boundary conditions like heat flux and adverse gravitational pressure drop—are systematically analyzed in Section 4. Finally, based on the parametric study, a design guideline for the pore topology within the wick is proposed.
2. Mathematical model
Fig. 1(a) illustrates the structure of a typical loop heat pipe (LHP), consisting of a compensation chamber, evaporator, condenser, vapor line and liquid line. The evaporator's key component is a concentric-cylinder-shaped wick embedded within a metal shell featuring periodically circumferential vapor grooves. As a result, the thermodynamic properties of the wick exhibit circumferential symmetry and axial periodicity. The repetitive unit within the wick, as magnified in Fig. 1(b) and (c), with an inner radius of rin, an outer radius of rout and a length of lz, is defined as the primary computational domain in this study. Meanwhile, the sealing clearance of thickness δout between the wick outer surface and the heating surface is also incorporated into the computational domain.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (1012KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. (a) Schematic of loop heat pipe, (b) Evaporator with circumferential vapor grooves, (c) The basic unit within the wick.

Heat is applied to the left half of the outer wick surface (0≤z ≤ lz/2), whereas the right half is exposed to the vapor groove. This heat input on the outer surface triggers the evaporation of the liquid inside the wick, leading to the formation of a vapor-liquid interface. As shown in Fig. 1(c), the computational domain can be divided into two distinct regions by the phase boundary C′-S′-D′-E’. The first region, designated by A-B-C′-S′-D′-E′, is saturated with liquid. The second region, enclosed by E′-D′-S′-C′-C-D-E, is the vapor region. Fig. 1(c) also magnifies the velocity field in the vapor region, which comprises the vapor both in the wick and the sealing clearance. As shown, due to the impermeability of the solid boundary C-D, the sealing clearance beneath the heated region serves as the escaping passage of the vapor generated at the vapor-liquid interface C-S′-D’.
In the following section, a 2D dynamic model will be built based on the computational domain, to capture the transient phase boundary position and the thermodynamic fields on both the liquid and vapor sides. Assumptions employed in the model derivation are listed as follows.
1)
The wick is homogeneous, isotropic and rigid porous media.
2)
Fluids inside the porous media are characterized by low-Reynolds number.
3)
Apart from fluid density, the properties for the solid, liquid, and vapor are constant.
4)
The wick is positioned horizontally so that the effect of gravity is negligible within the porous medium; However, different anti-gravity heights are considered for the outer loop including the liquid line, vapor line and condenser.
5)
Heat radiation, and viscous dissipation are neglected.
6)
There is a local thermal equilibrium between fluid and solid. Namely, the variation of the thermophysical field along the local meniscus within the meso-scale pores is deemed negligible.
7)
Heat flux is supplied evenly across the heated surface.
Before proceeding, a schematic diagram illustrating the relationship among the following equations is presented in Fig. 2. In summary, section 2.1 Momentum equation, 2.2 Continuity equation, 2.3 Energy equation respectively address the momentum, mass and energy conservation equations for both the liquid and vapor phases, along with the corresponding initial and boundary conditions. Section 2.4 incorporates interphase functions that serve as a bridge between the equation sets for liquid and vapor regions.
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (583KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Relationship among Sections 2.1-2.4.

2.1. Momentum equation
In a homogenous porous medium saturated with a single-phase fluid at low-Reynolds numbers and where gravity is neglected, Darcy's law governs momentum conservation in both the radial and axial directions [32], as shown in Eq. (1a) and Eq. (1b).
(1a)
(1b)
Eq. (1a) and Eq. (1b) are valid in both the liquid and vapor regions, with the subscripts l and g respectively designating the liquid and vapor phases.
2.2. Continuity equation
Eq. (2) represents the continuity equation for a single-phase fluid flowing through the concentric cylindrical porous media [21]. The left side of the equation captures the temporal variation of fluid mass density within the porosity (ϕ) of the media, reflecting how the fluid mass density changes over time. The right side of the equation denotes the local divergence of the mass flux, indicating the net rate at which fluid is entering or leaving a small volume element within the porous structure.
(2)
The equation of state of the fluid is as follows:
(3)
By incorporating Eq. (2), Eq. (3) into Eq. (1), a partial differential equation governing the pressure fluid inside the porous media is derived.
(4)
As elaborated in Fig. 1(c), the overall calculation domain is delineated by the boundary A-B-C-D-E and is divided into two separate regions by the liquid-vapor interface C′-S′-D′-E’. The function rs(t,z) represents the radial coordinate of C′-S′-D′-E′ with respect to different axial coordinate. Eq. (4) is valid in both the liquid and vapor regions.
Pressure field inside the porous media can be numerically derived from Eq. (4) once the appropriate initial and boundary conditions are specified. The initial conditions are relatively simple, as shown in Eq. (5).
(5)
The boundary conditions for the liquid zone A-B-C′-S′-D′-E′ are specified as follows.
1)
Saturated liquid is sucked into the porous media through its inner boundary A-B.
(6)
2)
Symmetric boundary conditions are employed for the B-C′ and A-E′, as they are the boundaries delineating the repetitive units.
(7)
3)
The pressure boundary conditions for liquid zone at the liquid-vapor interface C′-S′-D′-E′ is expressed as follows.
(8)
where the superscript – suggests that the corresponding equation is only valid at the negative side (liquid side) of the interface. The liquid-side pressure at interface, denoted by ps,l and treated as a known variable here, can be derived based on the interface model detailed in section 2.4.
The boundary conditions for the vapor zone E′-D′-S′-C′-C-D-E are specified as follows.
1)
The pressure boundary conditions for vapor zone at the liquid-vapor interface C′-S′-D′-E′ is expressed as follows.
(9)
where the superscript + suggests that corresponding equation is only valid at the position side (vapor side) of the interface. The vapor-side pressure at interface, denoted by ps,g and treated as a known variable here, can be derived based on the interface model detailed in section 2.4.
2)
Symmetric boundary conditions are employed for the C′-C and E′-E, and their boundary conditions are the same as B-C′ and A-E’ (Eq. (7)).
3)
The C-D boundary is a solid wall, which prevents fluid penetration. Vapor flows axially through the sealing clearance toward the outlet. In this case, the following mass conservation is satisfied within an infinitesimal of the sealing clearance:
(10)
where Vr, Vz,in, Vz,out, Ar, Az, Kδ and δout, as illustrated in Fig. 3, are radial velocity flowing into the infinitesimal from the wick, the axial entering velocity, the axial exiting velocity, the radial cross-sectional area, the axial cross-sectional area, the permeability of the sealing clearance and the width of the sealing clearance, respectively. The newly proposed parameters Vr, Vz,in, Vz,out, Ar and Az are correlated with given parameters K, Kδ, μg, rout, δout, as shown in Eq. (11).
(11)
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (172KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Schematic diagram of axial velocity calculation for sealing clearance.

By combining Eq. (11) with Eq. (10), the boundary condition for the C-D boundary can be obtained.
(12)
4)
Vapor flows out of the porous media through the boundary D-E with a pressure of pout.
(13)
2.3. Energy equation
As previously mentioned, the repetitive unit is composed of the solid skeleton and the fluid that saturates the porosity of the solid skeleton. Under the consumption of constant thermophysical properties, the energy conservation equations of the solid skeleton are expressed as follows:
(14)
where the source term qf,s represents the volumetric heat transfer from the fluid to the solid.
Once viscous dissipation and gravity are neglected, the energy conservation on the fluid side can be expressed as Eq. (15) [32], indicating that the material derivative of the internal energy density equals to the sum of surface work during fluid deformation, fluid heat conduction and heat transfer from the solid skeleton. Eq. (15) is also valid for both the liquid and vapor regions.
(15)
Based on the correlation Eq. (16) among the internal energy ef, enthalpy hf and fluid temperature T, the internal energy-based equation, Eq. (14) and Eq. (15) can then be incorporated into temperature-based equation Eq. (17).
(16)
(17)
with the effective thermal conductivity kt and density ρt defined as
(18)
(19)
Temperature field inside the porous media can be numerically derived from Eq. (17) once the appropriate initial and boundary conditions are specified. The initial conditions are relatively simple, as shown in Eq. (20).
(20)
The boundary conditions for the liquid zone A-B-C′-S′-D′-E′ are specified as follows.
1)
Saturated liquid is sucked into the porous media through its inner boundary A-B.
(21)
2)
Symmetric boundary conditions are employed for the B-C′ and A-E′, as they are the boundaries delineating the repetitive units.
(22)
3)
The temperature boundary conditions for liquid zone at the liquid-vapor interface C′-S′-D′-E′ are expressed as follows.
(23)
The boundary conditions for the vapor zone E′-D′-S′-C′-C-D-E are specified as follows.
1)
At the phase interface C′-S′-D′-E′, the vapor temperature Ts,g and the liquid temperature Ts,l are in local thermal equilibrium, and therefore are equal.
(24)
2)
Symmetric boundary conditions are employed for the C′-C and E′-E, and their boundary conditions are the same as B-C′ and A-E’ (Eq. (22))
3)
Heat flux is applied through the C-D boundary, while no heat flux is applied at the D-E boundary.
(25)
2.4. Phase interface equation
Determining the pressure and temperature field using the aforementioned equations entails supplementary information on the interface properties, such as interface liquid pressure ps,l, interface vapor pressure ps,g, and interface temperature Ts. Thanks to the existence of capillary forces, porous media can sustain a maximum pressure difference pc,max between the vapor and liquid at its phase boundary. Namely, once the phase boundary is receded into the wick, the pressure difference across the liquid-vapor interface adheres to Eq. (26). On the other hand, if the pressure difference is under the threshold value pc,max, the phase boundary will stick to the outer surface of the system as expressed in Eq. (27).
(26)
(27)
Meanwhile, mass conservation and energy conservation are satisfied at the phase interface.
(28)
(29)
In the initial state, the phase interface is located at rout (rs(t,z) = rout).
(30)
Interphase velocity can be derived based on the Schrage model [26], which is derived from molecular dynamics and is strictly applicable to molecular transport processes at the interface. As indicated by Schrage model, evaporation mass flux at a phase interface with temperature Ts, vapor side pressure ps,g, and liquid-vapor pressure difference Δps,lg can be expressed by Eq. (31).
(31)
where Vs,g denotes the evaporation velocity at the interface.
The solution of Eq. (31) requires the determination of the saturated pressure psat,g in the presence of capillary forces. This can be achieved by simultaneously solving Kelvin equation [33] and Clausius-Clapeyron [34,35] equation. Specifically, Kelvin equation (Eq. (32)) quantifies how the presence of capillary forces at the meniscus alters the saturated pressure at the liquid-vapor interface, relative to what it would be in the absence of a meniscus. Clausius–Clapeyron equation (Eq. (33)) then offers a means to determine saturated pressure at a meniscus-free liquid-vapor interface
(32)
(33)
where psat,g and psat,eq respectively denote the vapor pressure with and without capillary force.
By solving the supplementary equations at the phase interface, the temperature Ts,g, Ts,l and pressure ps,g, ps,l at the interface can determined. These values are then applied as boundary conditions in the momentum and energy equations, enabling the solution of the flow field across the entire computational domain.
3. Numerical methodology
3.1. Discretization method
To derive the numerical solutions of the differential equation set in Section 2, the foremost step is to discretize the calculation domain. In this study, we utilize staggered grids commonly used in the SIMPLE algorithm. As shown in Fig. 4, the wick region is discretized into numerous infinitesimals with uniform radial and axial dimensions, Δr and Δz. A row of infinitesimal grid cells, each with a radial dimension of δout, is extended on the outer surface of the wick to represent the sealing clearance. The temperature and pressure nodes are located in the center of each infinitesimal, while the velocity nodes are located in the center of the boundaries between neighboring infinitesimals. The infinitesimal is numbered sequentially from left to right and from bottom to top. Temperature and pressure corresponding to the grid (i, j) are denoted as Ti,j and pi,j. The velocities at the left, right, lower and upper boundaries of the grid (i, j) are numbered respectively as Vi-1/2, j, Vi+1/2, j, Vi, j-1/2, Vi, j+1/2.
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (704KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Discrete schematic diagram of the calculation domain of the basic unit within the wick.

To facilitate the numerical computation, several simplifications regarding to the velocity field are adopted. The evaporation vapor velocity at the phase boundary has only a radial component. The vapor velocity at the left-half top grid, representing the escaping velocity through the clearance has only an axial component. Meanwhile, only the radial movement of the phase boundaries is considered. Transient phase boundary locations rs(t,z) can thereby be derived based on the above equations. It should be noted that the phase boundary does not necessarily align with the grid boundaries. Instead, a truncated phase boundary 
 lying at the closest grid boundaries beneath rs(t,z) as in Fig. 4, is introduced to approximate the precise phase boundary rs(t,z) and to simply the property derivation at the interface. A mathematical definition of the newly-proposed phase boundary is shown in Eq. (34). In both the continuous and discretized equations in this study, the two-phase boundaries 
 and rs(t,z) coexist and are distinguished by an upper notation “^”.
(34)
Function discretization is then performed based on the discretized grids. For the pressure equation, an implicit scheme is employed for the transient term, while a first-order central difference scheme is used for the diffusion term. For the energy equation, the transient term, convection term and diffusion term are respectively treated with an implicit, a first-order upwind, and a central difference scheme.
The discretized formulation is detailed in APPENDIX A.
3.2. Calculation algorithm
In this study, an iterative method in Fig. 5(a) is employed to solve the physical fields within the computational domain. By inputting the general parameters, initial conditions, and boundary conditions, the discretized equations can be solved through coupled iterative computation across different modules, yielding the transient phase boundary position along with the corresponding thermodynamic field. A stable flow field will be obtained once the variation of the phase boundary position from one time step to the next is almost zero.
Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (868KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Model solving algorithm (a) Overall algorithm, (b) Datailed algorithms for solving discrete equations.

Fig. 5(b) presents the detailed calculation algorithm for the discretized equations corresponding to a single time step. Specifically, the discretized equations can be divided into six modules. The first module incorporating Eq. (A.22) is used to obtain interface pressure. The second module incorporating Eq. (A.25) is used to derive evaporation rate. The third module based on Eqs. (A.3-A.11) is pertaining to pressure field. The fourth module Eqs. (A.1, A.2) is utilized to compute velocity field. The fifth module Eqs. (A.12-21) can be used to derive temperature field. The sixth module Eqs. (A.23,A.24) is used to calculate interface moving velocity and temperature. The resolution processes of these modules are coupled. For example, the interface pressure module (Module 1) is only derivable given the information of the temperature Ts,g at the phase interface from Module 6. The resolution of Module 6, however, entails the information on the interface pressure. A five-layer iterative algorithm as shown in Fig. 5(b) is then designed to solve the equation set A.1-A.25 simultaneously.
The numerical solution process adopts the following steps.
1.
Initialize the computational domain and input the physical parameters.
2.
Record the current position of the vapor-liquid interface, update the physical parameters, and start the calculation for the current time step;
3.
Module 1-Interface pressure: Based on the assumed evaporation velocity Vs,g and temperature Ts,g at the phase interface and pressure field pg, pl adjacent to the interface, derive the pressure at the phase interface ps,g using Eq. (A.22);
4.
Module 2-Interface mass conservation: Based on the assumed interface moving speed drs/dt, derive the evaporation velocity Vs,g, liquid velocity Vs,l and liquid pressure ps,l at the interface using Eq. (A.22, A.25), return to Step 3 and iteratively update the evaporation velocity Vs,g until convergence;
5.
Module 3-Pressure field: Assume the temperature field Tg, Tl, solve for the pressure field pg, pl using Eq. (A.3-A.11), return to Step 3 and iteratively update the pressure field pg, pl until convergence;
6.
Module 4-Velocity field: Solve for the velocity in the domain using Eqs.(A.1, A.2);
7.
Module 5-Temperature field: Solve for the temperature field Tg, Tl in the domain using Eq. (A.12-A.21), return to Step 5 and iteratively update the temperature field Tg, Tl until convergence;
8.
Module 6-Interface energy conservation: Solve for the temperature Ts,g at the phase interface and interface moving speed drs/dt using Eqs. (A.23, A.24), return to Step 3 and iteratively update interface moving speed drs/dt and the temperature Ts,g at the phase interface until convergence;
9.
Determine whether the interface is stable. If stable, output the flow field; otherwise, return to Step 2 and start the next time step iteration.
The Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) is taken as the convergence criteria, and the convergence criteria respectively for the pressure field, temperature field and phase boundary position are as follows:
(35)
(36)
(37)
Where n, k, imax, jmax represen the time step, iteration step, grid number along the axial direction and grid number along the radial direction, respectively.
Radial and axial grid independence verification is also conducted. In this study, the calculation is considered grid-independent once the following criterion is met.
(38)
where the s and sref respectively represent the interface location derived by the current grid and a more refined grid (either radially or axially).
Fig. 6 presents the phase interface positions obtained under different radial and axial grid densities. As shown, a grid density of 32 × 128 is sufficient to achieve a convergent solution. The corresponding grid size is as small as 0.047 mm (Δz) and 0.039 mm (Δr).
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (285KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. (a) Verification of axial grid independence, (b) Verification of radial grid independence.

The validity of the proposed numerical model is confirmed by previous experimental data from existing literature [7,14,36] as shown in Fig. 7. The RMSE for the simulation compared with the three sets of experimental results are 5.8 %, 20 %, and 24.3 %, respectively. The proposed model reasonably reflects actual physical behavior and demonstrates satisfactory accuracy and applicability. More details regarding the geometric, operational and design parameters adopted in the experimental data, and thus in the numerical model, are presented in Appendix B.
Fig. 7
Download: Download high-res image (332KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Comparison of simulation results and experimental results under different heat flux.

Based on the previously proposed algorithm, several numerical cases are conducted. Table 2, Table 3 enumerated the constants and variables adopted in the numerical cases. Specifically, pout is used to denote the outer loop pressure drop, resulting from flowing friction and anti-gravity height. In this study, however, the flowing friction across the outer loop - which would be smaller than 200 Pa if using a tube with an inner diameter of 4 mm and a length of 1 m - is assumed negligible compared to the employed maximum capillary force (>9 kPa). Therefore, in this study, the employed outer loop pressure drop is equal to the anti-gravity pressure penalty.
Table 2. A summary of the constants adopted in the numerical cases.

Wick structure parameters
Parameters	Values	Parameters	Values
lz	1.5 mm	δout	4 μm
rout	7.5 mm	ϕ	0.6
rin	2.5 mm		
Fluid thermophysical parameters
Parameters	Values	Parameters	Values
cp,g	3176.7 J/(kg·K)	R	8.314 J/(mol·K)
cp.l	4800.1 J/(kg·K)	T0	300 K
cw	444 J/(kg·K)	α	0.058
h0,g	1627.7 kJ/kg	βp,l	0
h0,l	469.7 kJ/kg	βT,l	0.00257 K-1
hl,g	1158.0 kJ/kg	μg	9.89 × 10−6 Pa s
kg	0.0264 W/(m·K)	μl	1.29 × 10−4 Pa s
kl	0.48 W/(m·K)	ρ0,l	599.97 kg/m3
kw	90.7 W/(m·K)	ρ0,g	8.25 kg/m3
Kout	5 × 10−13 m2	ρw	8900 kg/m3
psat,0	1,061,700 Pa		
Table 3. A summary of the variables adopted in the numerical cases.

Empty Cell	K
(10−14 m2)	q (W/cm2)	pc_max (kPa)	anti-gravity (kPa)
Case A: 1–6 (6 points)	2	5,10,12.5,15,17.5,20	18	0.00
Case B: 1–36 (36 points)	1,2,5,9,12,24	15	9,12,15,18,21,24	0.00
Case C: 1–36 (36 points)	1,2,5,9,12,24	15	9,12,15,18,21,24	5.00
Case D:1–36 (36 points)	1,2,5,9,12,24	15	9,12,15,18,21,24	10.00
4. Discussions
4.1. Temperature and pressure field characteristics
4.1.1. Case without Vapor–Liquid interface recession
The vapor-liquid interface remains fixed at the outer surface of the wick when the capillary force can sufficiently overcome the drag required to circulate the liquid and evaporated vapor across the wick, sealing clearance and outer loop. In this case, the overall flow field distribution exhibits similar pattern for different heat flux levels, although the magnitudes of the temperature, velocity and pressure fields vary. The blue-filled cells in Fig. 8 indicate all simulated cases without interface recession. Fig. 9 shows the steady-state flow field distribution when permeability is 2 × 10−14 m2, capillary force is 18,000 Pa, and heat flux is 5 W/cm2 (Case A1 in Fig. 8).
Fig. 8
Download: Download high-res image (838KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. The states of the wick within different cases.

Fig. 9
Download: Download high-res image (481KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Steady state at K = 2 × 10−14 m2, q = 5 W/cm2, Pc = 18,000 Pa (a) Pressure; (b) Temperature; (c) Radial velocity.

The pressure field inside the wick is illustrated in Fig. 9(a). It should be noted that the pressure field shown in Fig. 9(a) represents the difference between the fluid pressure and the saturation pressure within the porous media. A gradual radial pressure drop is observed from the liquid inlet to the outlet. The vapor and liquid pressure at the interface are then provided in Fig. 10. As shown, an axial pressure drop prevails in the vapor side beneath the heating zone, which serves to overcome the drag experienced by the vapor flowing through the narrow sealing clearance. In contrast, vapor flows freely beneath the vapor grooves, resulting in a negligible pressure difference between the local vapor pressure and the liquid intake pressure under zero anti-gravity scenarios. Additionally, a pressure jump between the liquid and vapor side, decreasing along the z direction, is sustained by the capillary force. In this case, the capillary force required for wick operation remains below the maximum capillary limit, and therefore, no liquid recession occurs within the wick.
Fig. 10
Download: Download high-res image (364KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 10. Pressure distribution at the vapor-liquid interface of the wick without interface recession.

Driven by the pressure gradient, the liquid in the wick flows radially outward. From the inlet to the outlet, the cross-sectional area available for radial flow increases, leading to a gradual decrease in radial velocity across most regions of the wick. However, near wick outer surface, the periodically distributed heating boundaries induces an increase in radial flow velocity at the left-half region and a decrease at the right-half region, as shown in Fig. 9(c).
Fig. 9(b) presents the temperature field distribution within the wick. Fluid beneath the heating zone is with the highest temperature. The thermal energy is then transferred to the right-half region and the inner surface mainly by conduction. Evaporation mass flux at the wick outer surface is closely correlated with the surface temperature. The temperature at the wick outer surface stabilizes when the associate average evaporation mass flux equals the ratio of heat flux to specific evaporation heat.
4.1.2. Case with Vapor–Liquid interface recession
When the pressure required for fluid transport in the wick and the sealing clearance exceeds the available capillary force, recession of the vapor-liquid interface takes place. The yellow-filled cells in Fig. 8 indicate all simulated cases with interface recession. In Fig. 11 shows the dynamic-state flow field distribution when permeability is 2 × 10−14 m2, capillary force is 18,000 Pa, and heat flux is 15 W/cm2(Case A4 in Fig. 8).
Fig. 11
Download: Download high-res image (714KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 11. Dynamic state at K = 2 × 10−14 m2, q = 15 W/cm2, Pc = 18,000 Pa (a) Pressure; (b) Temperature; (c) Radial velocity.

As shown in Fig. 11(a), the pressure field on the liquid side decreases gradually from the inlet to the outlet. A pressure jump occurs at the vapor-liquid interface due to the capillary force. As further illustrated in Fig. 12, vapor-liquid pressure difference in the recession region remains at maximum capillary force, while the un-receded region exhibit a pressure difference below this threshold value. Additionally, across the interface, the radial velocity undergoes a jump, maintaining a constant mass flow rate of the vapor and liquid phases despite their significant density variation.
Fig. 12
Download: Download high-res image (351KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 12. Pressure distribution at the vapor-liquid interface of the wick with interface recession.

The temperature field is then depicted in Fig. 11(b), which exhibits a much steeper temperature gradient in the vapor region beneath the heating zone than in the liquid region. The heat flux from the heating zone is conducted through the vapor region to the interface. Part of the heat reaching the interface is used to evaporate local fluid, while the rest is transferred into the liquid beneach the interface. This heat is then conducted through the liquid to the other regions. Particularly, evaporation at the unheated outer surface is sustained by the heat conducted from the heated region. That is, the vapor region has a stepper temperature gradient due to the larger heat flux and smaller heat conductivity. This explains that why cases with the interface recession are normally with higher evaporation temprature and thermal resistance.
Fig. 13 illustrates the transient evolution of the vapor-liquid interface over time. Prior to the application of heat flux, the wick is fully saturated with liquid. Upon the introduction of heat flux, evaporation initiates at the heated boundary. When the capillary force required to sustain liquid transport exceeds the maximum available capillary force, liquid recession occurs. Consequently, the vapor-liquid interface commences at the ceneter of the heating zone and gradually extends in both the radial and axial directions. Over time, the evolution of the phase boundary slows down and eventually stabilizes.
Fig. 13
Download: Download high-res image (289KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 13. Dynamic moving process of phase interface position over time at K = 2 × 10−14 m2, q = 15 W/cm2, Pc = 18,000 Pa.

4.1.3. Case with wick dry-out
As discussed before, the phase interface will eventually stabilize at a fixed position. However, some systems seem to fail to find a stabilized position during the gradual invasion of the phase boundary, and the dry-out happens eventually. The red-filled cells in Fig. 8 indicate all simulated cases with wick dry-out. For example, the following parameters will result in an utimate dry-out in wick: permeability K = 2 × 10−14 m2, heat flux q = 15 W/cm2, capillary force Pc = 12,000 Pa, and pressure drop against gravity of 5000 Pa (Case C26 in Fig. 8).
As illustrated in Fig. 14(a), the wick undergoes a series of stages during the dry-out process: (1) Upon the application of heat flux, evaporation initiates at the heated surface of the wick. (2) The liquid recession commences at the center of the heated region and gradually moves in both radial and axial directions. (3) The vapor zone keeps expanding until it invades the region beneath the vapor grooves. (4) Afterwards, the wick outer surface, either beneath the heated surface or vapor grooves, becomes entirely filled with vapor. (5) The vapor-liquid interface continues to move dramatically inward until it reaches an ultimate dry-out.
Fig. 14
Download: Download high-res image (381KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 14. (a) Dynamic diagram of vapor-liquid interface during the drying-out process; (b) The curve of temperature change with time during the drying-out process.

As shown in Fig. 14(b), the maximum temperature of the outer surface of the wick continues to rise during the whole stages. At stage 5, the temperature rise is much more violent than the previous 4 stages.
4.2. Parametric analysis
4.2.1. Different heat flux
Heat flux is a crucial parameter for the operation of loop heat pipes. Refs. [13,14] reveal a decrease in the effective heat transfer coefficient of the wick with respect to increasing heat flux, likely due to the recession of the vapor-liquid interface into the wick. Therefore, determining the vapor-liquid interface under different heat flux is of great significance for the theoretical analysis of the loop heat pipe.
Fig. 15(a) illustrates the variation of the vapor-liquid interface position against the heat flux (Case A1-A6 in Table 3), along with the corresponding capillary force distribution (Fig. 15(b)) at the interface. At low heat flux, the capillary force generated by the wick is sufficient to overcome the pressure drop of the fluid circulation. This enables the wick to maintain a fully saturated liquid evaporation state. As the heat flux increases, both the pressure drop within the wick and across the sealing clearance progressively rises due to the enhanced evporation rate. Consequently, the capillary force provided by the porous media, particularly near the center of the media zone, becomes inadequate. As a result, the vapor-liquid interface recedes into the wick.
Fig. 15
Download: Download high-res image (532KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 15. (a)Evolution of vapor-liquid interface, (b) Capillary force distribution at the phase interface of the wick under different heat flux, (c)Temperature at the heating surface under different heat flux.

Once the vapor-liquid interface begins to recede into the wick, the presence of the vapor zone hinders effective heat conduction to the evaporation interface, so that an increasing temperature is observed with the extension of the vapor region. Fig. 15(c) shows the heating surface temperatures under varying heat flux of the wick. When the wick is fully filled with liquid, the surface temperature remains relatively low. However, during the partial recession operation, the wick exhibits a pronounced temperature gradient with respect to heat flux. Under conditions of high heat flux, the wick eventually dries out, accompanied by a sharp temperature rise.
4.2.2. Different permeability and capillary force
The wick in the evaporator is a critical component of the loop heat pipe, with its permeability and capillary force being two dominant influential factors.
Under zero anti-gravity height and outer loop pressure drop, the maximum temperature within the wick was calculated with respect to varying maximum capillary force and permeability. To be specific, this study employs a maximum capillary force from 9000 Pa to 24,000 Pa, permeability from 1 × 10−14 m2 to 2.4 × 10−13 m2, and heat flux q = 15 W/cm2 (Case B1-B36 in Table 3), and the resulting contour map is presented in Fig. 16.
Fig. 16
Download: Download high-res image (404KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 16. Temperature contour map under different permeability and capillary force.

Fig. 16 can be categorized into three distinct regions based on the temperature gradient: (1) the full liquid region, (2) the partial recession within the wick, and (3) the wick dry-out region. Full liquid region is deemed the optimal design range for LHPs, with only a small temperature increase across the porous wick. As the capillary force or pemeability decreases, the vapor-liquid interface begins to recede into the wick. The deeper the interface recedes, the higher the temperature observed at the heating surface. Consequently, the surface temperature increase dramatically with the decrease of the permeability or capillary force. A further increase in the capillary force or permeability will result in dry-out, with its characteristics detailed in Section 4.1.3.
4.2.3. Different gravity pressure drops
Fig. 17 depicts the temperature contour maps with respect to different capillary forces and permeabilities under different anti-gravity conditions as shown in Table 3 (Case C1-C36 and Case D1-D36). Compared with Fig. 16, it is evident that under an anti-gravity pressure of 5000 Pa, the full-liquid region of the wick significantly contracts, while under 10,000 Pa, no full-liquid region is observed. Correspondingly, the dry-out region expands with increasing anti-gravity pressure. Furthermore, by comparing Fig. 16, Fig. 17, it can be seen that, under the same capillary force and permeability, the wick temperature increases with higher anti-gravity pressure. This is attributed to the deeper recession of the vapor-liquid interface caused by increased anti-gravity pressure penalty, which hinders effective heat transfer within the wick.
Fig. 17
Download: Download high-res image (441KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 17. Temperature contour maps under different permeability and capillary force at anti-gravity pressure drops of (a) 5000 Pa and (b) 10,000 Pa.

4.3. Influence of wick pore-size distribution
As shown in the previous sections, a large permeability and a large maximum capillary force can collectively contribute to a low thermal resistance and evaporation temperature. From the material level, however, the permeability and maximum capillary force seem to be a pair of conflicting parameters. On one hand, a small pore size leads to a large capillary force; on the other hand, wick permeability decreases with the diminishing pore size. Therefore, compromising between maximum capillary force and permeability through pore size tuning is essential for ensuring the efficient operation of the loop heat pipe. In the previous section, the operating temperatures of wicks under various capillary force and permeability conditions are summarized, as shown in Fig. 16. Different pore size distributions result in variations in capillary force and permeability, which subsequently lead to different thermal behaviors within the wick.
Typically, the pore size distribution in a wick follows a normal distribution. Raza et al. [37] proposed a method to determine the effective pore size and capillary force based on the particle diameter distribution function, as expressed in Eqs. (39), (40). In bi-porous wicks, large pores are introduced by adding pore-forming agent (PFA) in to the metal powder (MP). The size distributions of both the PFAs and the metal particles obey a normal distribution. Therefore, by superimposing the size distribution functions of the metal powder and the PFA, the overall diameter distribution function of the biporous wick can be established, allowing for the calculation of its effective pore diameter and capillary force.
(39)
 is effective spherical radius.
(40)
The permeability of mono-porous wick is calculated by the empirical formula obtained by Carman [38] through experimental data fitting:
(41)
The permeability of the bi-porous wick is calculated by the following form:
(42)
while ε represents the proportion of the pore-forming agent in the entire wick, D represents the diameter of the pore-forming agent and d represents the diameter of the metal powder, with C = 836 [39].
Incorporating Eqs. (39), (40), (41), (42), the variation trends of capillary force and permeability with particle diameter in both mono-porous and biporous wicks can be determined. These trend curves are superimposed on the temperature coutours lines obtained under zero anti-gravity pressure penalty, as shown in Fig. 18.
Fig. 18
Download: Download high-res image (577KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 18. Curves of capillary force and permeability with particle pore size for monoporous and biporous wicks.

When the heat flux is 15 W/cm2 and the influence of gravity is not taken into account (Case B:1–36 in Fig. 8), for monoporous wicks, the continuously increasing diameter of the metal powder (MP) particles (from 2 μm to 6 μm) results in a decrease in capillary force and an increase in permeability. The enhanced permeability reduces the flow pressure drop within the wick; however, the reduced capillary force leads to a larger recession area of the vapor-liquid interface, thereby causing an increase in the thermal resistance and operation temperature of the wick. For mono-porous wicks, the metal powder diameter of 2 μm is identified as optimal.
In bi-porous wicks, when the MP diameter is fixed at 2 μm and the PFA to MP volume ratio is 20 %, a small diameter ratio between PFA and MP results in a slight increase in permeability, while the maximum capillary force decreases, which leads to a negligible reduction in the wick's operating temperature. However, as the diameter ratio increases, the larger PFA particles significantly enhance the wick's permeability with a slight decline in the maximum capillary force, thereby reducing the operating temperature markedly, as shown in Fig. 18. A combination of smaller metal powder size and larger PFA particle size leads to a lower operating temperature.
Moreover, increasing the volume ratio of the PFA to MP from 20 % to 30 % further enlarges the effective pore size. This enlargement reduces the capillary force while simultaneously increasing permeability. Under conditions of large PFA particle diameters, the wick with a 20 % PFA-MP volume ratio demonstrates a significantly lower operating temperature compared to the wick with a 30 % ratio. When the PFA-MP volume ratio increases further to 50 %, the excessive presence of the PFA drastically reduces the capillary force. This reduction results in a larger recession region of the vapor-liquid interface within the wick. Consequently, thermal resistance increases, leading to a higher operating temperature compared to wicks with 20 % and 30 % volume ratios.
Overall, within the calculation range, the optimal pore-size distribution for the bi-porous wick is achieved when the MP diameter is smaller than 2 μm, the PFA diameter is greater than 16 μm, and the PFA-MP volume ratio is between 20 % and 30 %. Under these conditions, the wick operates at its lowest temperature. From a manufacturing perspective, nickel powders and salts are respectively promising materials for MPs and PFAs. Appropriate sintering conditions, such as pressure and temperature, are also essential to achieve the desired topology, yet they are beyond the scope of this study.
5. Conclusions
In this study, a two-dimensional transient mathematical model of the wick in a loop heat pipe is developed to simulate the liquid-vapor behavior within the wick. Based on this model, the transient movement of vapor-liquid interface is captured. Meanwhile, both steady-state and transient flow fields are obtained. A detailed analysis is conducted on various parameters affecting the operational performance of the wick. The main conclusions are summarized as follows.
1)
The thermodynamic states within the wick can be divided into three distinct states: full-liquid, partial recession, and dry-out. In the full-liquid state, both thermal resistance and operation temperature remain at a relatively low level. As the vapor-liquid interface recedes, the thermal resistance and the operational temperature increase proportionally with the area invaded by vapor. A significant temperature rise is observed in the dry-out state.
2)
Maximum capillary force and permeability are key parameters for characterizing the wick performance. Under a fixed heat flux, as the capillary force and permeability of the wick increase, the state of the wick undergoes a transition from the dry-out state to the partial-recession state, and eventually to the full-liquid state. Under anti-gravity conditions, the dry-out region of the wick expands, while the full liquid region shrinks.
3)
Owing to the coexistence of large and small pores within bi-porous wicks, they can provide sufficient capillary force while maintaining relatively high permeability. Therefore, compared with mono-porous wicks, bi-porous wicks exhibit superior performance. Specifically, bi-porous wicks, implemented by small metal powders (MP, <2 μm), large pore-forming agent (PFA, >16 μm) diameters and an appropriate PFA-MP volume ratio (20 %∼30 %), can maintain a large permeability with slightly reduced capillary force, leading to a lower operating temperature of the wick.
However, the proposed model still has certain limitations.
1)
This model is constructed under the assumptions of homogeneity and isotropy, yet it does not thoroughly address the impact of pore-scale heterogeneity.
2)
Additionally, the three-dimensional effects of real LHPs, such as circumferential vapor channels, non-uniform heat flux, gravity-induced flow maldistribution, are neglected. These effects can lead to complicated two-phase behavior within the wick.
3)
Due to the multi-variable nature of the model, the design guidelines are developed for a specific solid skeleton, working fluid, and wick geometry. A general quantitative design based on the model is anticipated.