Abstract
This article proposes an explicit analytical solution for determining the 3D transient temperature of a semi-infinite medium receiving a surface flux on a spiral-shaped strip. This solution is useful for several applications such as TPS devices or the assembly of cylindrical parts machined on a lathe, among others. The analytical developments are carried out until there is only one integral left to be performed numerically. This integral relates to the angular direction, which has limited integration bounds, and can be calculated very quickly using standard computing software. The results obtained using the proposed solution are in excellent agreement with those obtained from numerical modeling. The analytical calculation times are extremely short and avoid the need for numerical modeling, which requires long calculation times. Temperature plots and thermal maps are presented and analyzed.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Spiral heat source3D transient analytical solutionHeat sourceHeat diffusion
Nomenclature

Upper radius of the spiral, 
Greek symbols
spiral strip width, 
Thermal conductivity, 
Hypergeometric function, 
Thermal diffusivity, 
Bessel function of the first kind of order 
, 
Heat flux density, 
Number of turns in a spiral, 
Subscript/Superscript
Cylindrical coordinate, 
Fourier transform of 
Time, 
Fourier and Hankel transforms of 
Temperature rise, 
Acronyms
Cartesian coordinate, 
Transient Plane Source
1. Introduction
Knowledge of the temperature of a solid receiving heat on a spiral-shaped strip is of interest for several applications, such as TPS devices, used for the thermal characterization of materials, or the assembly of mechanical parts obtained by lathe machining, and so on. This problem is part of studies devoted to heat sources, which have given rise to numerous works. Manca et al. [1] developed an explicit analytical solution for the thermal behavior associated with the 3D thermal response of a semi-infinite medium subjected to a rectangular surface heat source. Bardon [2] proposed approaches for studying transfer phenomena at solid-solid interfaces involving several heat sources. Degiovanni et al. [3] developed approaches for contacts under transient conditions. Hamraoui and Zouaoui [4] proposed analytical solutions for moving heat sources associated with the problem of two rollers in relative motion. Other analytical solutions have been proposed for transient problems related to heat sources dissipating a non-uniform axisymmetric heat flux [5,6]. Sadhal [7,8] developed sophisticated solutions for contact problems in transient configurations. Gaussian heat source configurations, simulating the heat flux of a laser, have also been studied [9,10].
To our knowledge, there are no solutions associated with a real spiral-shaped heat source available in the literature. This configuration is often simulated by a succession of concentric rings [11,12]. In Ref. [12], an analytical solution is developed to simulate the temperature of a cylindrical bar, whose circular surface is formed by concentric ring-shaped heat sources. For the TPS device [11], the authors studied the influence of the thermal contact resistance between the source and the solid material whose characteristics are sought using the quadrupole method and the usual solution based on concentric rings. For the same characterization purposes, the transient temperature of the heating zone of a circular surface presented in Ref. [5] was used [13], thus allowing the study of measurement uncertainties related to the TPS device.
In this article, we develop an exact analytical solution to determine the temperature at any point on the solid and at any time, considering the geometry of the spiral-shaped surface heat source. For comparison purposes, the same configuration is also simulated numerically using the Comsol Multiphysics software, which uses the finite element method.
2. Description of the studied problem and governing equations
Consider a semi-infinite medium (Fig. 1), initially at zero reference temperature and suddenly subjected to a surface heat source in the form of a spiral with thickness 
, consisting of 
 turns. In the example in Fig. 1, 
. After 
 rotations of 
, the spiral ends at radius 
 on the inside and 
 on the outside. The heated area receives a heat flux of density 
 while the rest of the surface is considered adiabatic.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (432KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Studied problem.

The equation for the inner radius of the spiral is:
(1)
To prevent the edges of the spiral from touching each other, we must have 
.
The temperature of the solid in cylindrical coordinates 
 is governed by the following equations
(2)
It must satisfy the following conditions:
(3)
3. Analytical solution
Given the periodicity conditions along the 
-direction on 
 and the boundary conditions along the 
-direction, the following finite complex Fourier transform and infinite Hankel transform should be applied to the above equations such that
(4)
Equations (2), (3) become
(5)
(6)
With 
To facilitate the solving of equations (5), (6) it is advisable to perform the following function change
(7)
Equations (5), (6) then become
(8)
(9)
The system in 
 is that of a simple 1D diffusion problem with variable surface heat flux. It can be easily solved using Duhamel's theorem. We thus determine 
 under the following form
(10)
We now use the infinite inverse Hankel transform to obtain
(11)
The complex inverse Fourier transform is then applied to obtain the complete solution
(12)
with 
.
The infinite sum in 
 is reducible, which allows (12) to be written in the following form
(13)
We perform the integral over 
, and obtain the following expression
(14)
Finally, the integral over time yields the solution in the following form
(15)
By replacing 
 by 
 in equation (15), the solution is divided into two terms, one containing no time and the other containing time through the term 
.
The double integral (15) does not contain any singularities and can therefore be calculated numerically using computer software like Matlab® [14].
By adopting the following notations
and separating the stationary and variable terms, equation (15) can then be written as
(16)
with 
 and 
Equation (16) therefore consists of two terms, one stationary and the other variable, such that
(17)
The stationary component of the temperature is therefore the first term on the right-hand side of equation (16)
(18)
The variable component of temperature is the second term on the right-hand side of equation (16)
(19)
The variable component of temperature (19) tends toward zero as time tends toward infinity, since 
. Thus, temperature tends toward its steady-state component, which is physically consistent.
Let us first consider the stationary term (18). Integration with respect to 
 in equation (18) is straightforward and gives the expression
(20)
With
(21)
All that remains is the integral over 
, which can be calculated numerically and quickly without any difficulty.
Let us now consider the variable term given by equation (19).
First, let us set
(22)
and let's write
(23)
With
(24)
The integral 
 can be easily obtained by integrating by parts, So
(25)
Let us now consider 
 and express the function 
 in terms of the hypergeometric function such that
(26)
The argument of the hypergeometric function is formed here by adding two terms 
. We then use the addition theorem associated with confluent hypergeometric functions such that
(27)
with 
 and 
Substituting (27) into (26), we obtain
(28)
So
(29)
Or also
(30)
The complete expression of 
 is written as follows:
(31)
The final expression of the temperature of the solid at any point and at any time is written as
(32)
with 
 and 
The expressions for 
 and 
 are given by (21) and (31), respectively.
The integration over 
 from equation (32) is performed numerically using Matlab® tools [14]. It does not pose any particular difficulty. Functions 
 and 
 do not contain singularities, which allows for easy numerical integration. The only special case where 
 and 
 simultaneously, which corresponds to the surface temperature at the center of the heat source, can be deduced directly from equation (15) as follows:
(33)
with 
So
(34)
And the steady-state temperature is then written as
(35)
4. Results and analysis
We present the results obtained from the proposed solution (3) by systematically comparing them with those obtained by numerical modeling using COMSOL Multiphysics® software [15]. Given the semi-infinite geometry, we considered a cylinder whose radius and length along the z-direction are 20 times greater than the radius of the source for the numerical calculations. This avoids edge effects on the results. The boundary conditions on the lateral face of the cylinder and on the face opposite to 
 are those of the initial temperature (i.e., the reference temperature which is zero). The boundary condition on the face 
 is that of equation (3). A fine mesh was used in the vicinity of the heat source. Figure (2) shows the mesh structure with different zoom levels for better visualization. In order to obtain numerical results that are as accurate as possible, the mesh consists of 237 thousand elements. The resolution method is multigrid algebraic solver (AMG), generalized minimal residual method (GMRES).
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (504KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Mesh structure for numerical modeling.

To avoid unnecessarily increasing the number of case studies, we have used fixed values for certain parameters. These are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1. Data used for calculations.





 

0.01	8	3.125e-4	15	5e-6	1e4
Fig. 3 shows the changes in surface temperature as a function of radius, at angular position 
 and for different time of the evolution. The curves obtained by the proposed solution are in excellent agreement with those of numerical modeling. The curves accurately reflect the temperature increases at each pass through the thickness of the spiral.
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (350KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Changes in surface temperature as a function of radius at 
 and for different times: solid lines (Analytically) and dotted lines (Numerically).

In order to verify the validity of the solution in the depth direction of the solid, Fig. 4 shows the temperature variation at an off-center radius 
 and at an angular position off zero 
. The changes are calculated at different times. The representative curves obtained by the proposed analytical solution and those from numerical modeling are in excellent agreement and have consistent physical trends.
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (214KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Temperature evolution in the 
-direction at positions of 
 and 
 not equal to zero: solid lines (Analytically) and dotted lines (Numerically).

Fig. 5 shows surface thermal maps at different times. The maps highlight the heating zones of the spiral and their extension as time increases. The maps obtained analytically are similar to those determined numerically.
Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Thermal maps obtained analytically and numerically in the plane 
 and the Cartesian coordinates 

Other configurations using different numbers of spiral turns (N = 4 and N = 16) were tested. The analytical and numerical results show excellent agreement, as shown in Fig. 6. As might be expected, the greater the number of turns in the spiral, the more even the temperature distribution (all other things being equal).
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (493KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Changes in surface temperature for N = 4 and N = 16 as a function of radius at 
: solid lines (Analytically) and dotted lines (Numerically).

To quantify the differences between analytical and numerical calculations, temperatures at four different radii (r = 0.25a, 0.5a, 0.75a, and a) are plotted as a function of time for three different numbers of spiral turns (N = 4, 8, and 16). As shown in the plots in Fig. 7, these relative differences are less than 0.7 %.
Fig. 7
Download: Download high-res image (906KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Comparison of analytically and numerically calculated surface temperatures for N = 4, 8, and 16, at r = 0.25a, 0.5a, 0.75a, and a.

5. Conclusion
A new analytical solution was presented in this article to explicitly and rapidly determine the three-dimensional and transient thermal behavior of a solid subjected to a spiral-shaped surface heat source. It avoids numerical modeling, which requires long computation times and numerical mesh testing to ensure convergence of the calculations. This solution can be easily implemented in standard software. The results obtained were systematically compared with those of a carefully performed numerical simulation. The comparisons showed excellent agreement.
This solution represents the reality of the TPS device geometry and also the axial contacts between lathe-machined parts, which are spirals-shaped. It can also be used as a tool for dimensioning these systems.