Abstract
Wind turbine performance depends mainly on the wind speed and aerodynamics of blades. The roughness generated from ice accretion can significantly reduce the aerodynamics and consequently the power production of the wind turbine. This study locates the glaze and rime ice on the blade, to detect the critical zones involved in significant power production loss. On the blade, the distribution of the elementary power production as well as the type and thickness of the accreted ice are inconsistent. Under icing conditions, the outer section of the blade starting from the radial position r/R = 0.8 contribute significantly to the blades aerodynamics. The freezing fraction is unevenly distributed; since it initially forms rime ice near the root and then glaze toward the tip of the blade. The critical freezing fraction 0.88 associated with the double horn ice shape is spatially limited and occupies a restricted segment on the blade and gradually moves towards the tip with decreasing temperature. With the use of power degradation analogy with sub-scaled rotor blades of a helicopter under icing conditions, a power loss factor is introduced to quantify and locate power loss along the blades of wind turbines. The study is based on four values of liquid water content that delineate five classes of icing severity. Including power loss factor, the most significant power loss that corresponds to freezing fraction 0.88 is found to be located at r/R ~ [0.93 0.96] which corresponds to T = − 2.6 °C, − 4.5 °C, − 12 °C, and − 20 °C and for liquid water content LWC = 0.04 g · m− 3, 0.07 g · m− 3, 0.2 g · m− 3, and 0.36 g · m− 3 respectively. The resulted power degradation can reach a maximum of 40%. Locally it is the shape rather than the thickness of ice that causes more power loss, meanwhile when considering the whole blade, power degradation is controlled mainly by ice thickness regardless of the type of ice. The results obtained can help the setup of a sensor that triggers the ice-protection system upon detection of critical freezing fraction.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Ice accretionWind turbineRe-analysisAtmospheric icing climatology
1. Introduction
Numerous cold climate countries already utilize and will progressively make more use of wind energy, because of their propitious high wind potential. Cold climate regions represent an unavoidable beneficial environment for wind energy. For this reason and in order to maintain maximum extraction of power production, wind turbine manufacturers including blade's airfoil designers are required to accommodate the hazardous conditions of atmospheric icing events. Cold regions with higher altitudes represent the best sites for wind farms; wind speed increases approximately by 0 · 1 m · s− 1 each 100 m of altitude within the first 1000 m (Parent and Ilinca, 2011). Colder regions are characterized by a potential of wind power 10% higher than other regions, because of their higher air density. Since cold air is denser than warm air, it increases the kinetic energy of wind which leads to further power production of wind turbine (Fortin et al., 2005). Commonly wind turbine farms are located in coastal or mountainous areas; these regions are exposed frequently to icing events during the cold seasons (Tammelin and Säntti, 1998). Besides freezing precipitation, low-level stratus clouds at subzero temperatures and more specifically fog cause serious challenges to land, air and sea transportation and greatly affect the wind turbine industry (Bendix et al., 2005).
Ice accretion on the blade of a wind turbine reshapes the blade airfoil and affects negatively its aerodynamic properties. The damaging effect of atmospheric icing on wind turbine production is not limited to severe icing events and high amount of ice accretion; even small amounts of ice accretion on the leading edge of the blade degrades drastically the aerodynamic characteristics of the blade and consequently the expected electric power (Jasinski et al., 1998, Marjaniemi and Peltola, 1998). Furthermore, icing events affect wind assessment and the performance of wind farms by generating measurement errors, power losses, premature mechanical failures, electrical failure and safety hazards (Parent and Ilinca, 2011, Seifert et al., 2003). Besides load asymmetry, vibration and safety hazards, certain icing conditions may cause significant economic losses for the wind turbines industry.
The occurrences of severe icing events necessitate to set the wind turbine on non-operational mode in order to minimize ice accretion and its aerodynamic effects. In general, without the de-icing or the anti-icing procedures, ice accretion on the blades remains for a significantly longer period than duration the icing event itself (Laakso et al., 2010). Bose and Rong (1990) demonstrated that even a vestige of roughness generated from the smallest ice accretion on a wind turbine blade will weaken the expected wind energy by up to 20%. More precisely, wind energy that is weakened by ice accumulation and duration of icing events encounter power losses that range between 0.005% and 50% of the annual production (Botta et al., 1998, Laakso and Peltola, 2005, Tammelin and Säntti, 1996).
An experimental study achieved by Antikainen and Peuranen (2000) on wind turbine blades showed that icing events that last at least a few hours, generate a mass and aerodynamic unbalance. Furthermore, in case this asymmetrical state persists for a long period (days or weeks), the power production and turbine lifetime drop considerably. A costly anti-icing strategy is used to minimize icing effects; however it is not a practical solution for icing concerns since this strategy can consume approximately 25% of the energy produced by the wind turbine (Makkonen and Autti, 1991).
Previous studies have looked at wind turbine aerodynamics and performance degradation. The investigations and analysis involved the different effects of rime and glaze (Hochart et al., 2008), by analyzing ice accretion effects on lift to drag ratio (Hochart et al., 2008, Jasinski et al., 1998) and power degradation (Dierer et al., 2009, Jasinski et al., 1998). Hochart et al. (2008) analyzed in-fog icing measurements from the Murdochville wind farm in the Gaspé Peninsula (Canada). The study revealed a significant torque reduction located on the outer third of the blades. In order to counterbalance the icing effect on the blade, the active heating system on the blade represents an effective solution (Parent and Ilinca, 2011) that needs further devoted research to lower its cost. Under icing conditions, Dierer et al. (2009) indicated that the anti-icing heating system reduces the loss of the annual power production 3.5%, compared to 10% of annual loss without a heating system. Also, under rime conditions, Jasinski et al. (1998) demonstrated that the performance loss of wind turbine can reach 20%.
In attempting to assess the long term severity of atmospheric icing for wind turbines, Lamraoui et al. (2013) presented the climatology of icing severity for wind turbines, using 32 years (1979–2010) of meteorological data extracted from the North American Regional Reanalysis (NARR).
In general, the severity assessment of icing event depends on the field of application and the targeted problem being considered. The icing severity index introduced by Lamraoui et al. (2013) represents the varying degrees of icing severity that combine different threat factors by weighting each according to a scale of seriousness.
In collaboration with Bell Helicopter, Fortin and Perron (2009) performed an experimental study based on a spinning rotor blade developed at the Anti-icing Materials International Laboratory. The objective of that study is to investigate ice physics, low energy de-icing system and ice-phobic coatings for small helicopters. Compared to a clean blade, the power required to rotate an iced blade increases with decreasing air temperature until reaching its maximum at about 5200 W that corresponds to a critical freezing fraction of 0.88. This critical value is associated with the formation of a double horn ice shape. Beyond the maximum of 5200 W, the required power decreases with decreasing air temperature to reach its minimum at about 1200 W. This minimum power occurs when the blades are clean without ice accretion. The effect of air temperature on power is due to the ice shape change with the freezing fraction which in turn depends on air temperature and liquid water content. The partial freezing of water initiates a water runback that freezes afterward, causing an airfoil reshape and aerodynamic degradation.
With the use of the results of Fortin and Perron (2009), the present study focuses on identifying crucial parameters that control the type of ice accretion on the blades of a wind turbine which causes high power loss such as: Freezing fraction, liquid water content, temperature and the critical radial position on the blade. Typical values of icing events were extracted and calculated from NARR data during a time period of 32 years. The current paper also investigates and attempts to estimate the contribution of each localized zone along the blade of the wind turbine to power losses that occur under different icing conditions.
2. Methodology
The models used for the current study attempt to involve more relevant parameters, in order to improve the assessment of the severity of icing events, and more specifically the production loss of wind turbines caused by ice accretion.
In addition to the liquid water content and the duration of icing events for different icing severity classes involved in the quantification and the assessment of the icing severity index (Lamraoui et al., 2013), the present study focuses on exploring the aerodynamic degradation distribution along the blade, under different meteorological conditions and geometries of the blades. In order to cover a typical range of liquid water contents and various severity classes (Fikke et al., 2006, Lamraoui et al., 2013), the values of LWC 0.04 g · m− 3 (light), 0.07 g · m− 3 (moderate), 0.2 g · m− 3 (severe), 0.36 g · m− 3 (extreme) were considered for ice calculation. Under icing conditions, the distribution of the electric energy production along an optimal blade design was calculated, in order to locate the critical position on the blade that causes the highest power loss during icing events. The use of ice accretion and power loss models with different values of meteorological and geometric parameters enables the exploration to help locate the aerodynamic and mechanical effects along the blade. Several studies (Hochart et al., 2008, Lamraoui et al., 2013) have associated the value of liquid water content 0.2 g · m− 3 to representative occurrences of atmospheric icing over Murdochville, and to the average of maximum values during winter months over Mont Belair (Canada). Therefore, a particular intention was given to production losses that are associated this typically assumed liquid water content.
Unlike helicopters that require power to rotate, wind turbines rotate to provide power. Due to the lack of studies that investigate the impact of freezing fraction on wind turbines production, the effect of freezing fraction on power requirements for helicopter is projected on wind turbine power production. To begin, this study identifies the critical location which corresponds to the most aerodynamically hazardous freezing fraction (Fortin and Perron, 2009) on the blade that holds the maximum power loss. Then, the corresponding temperatures for typical liquid water contents are determined, and finally power loss is evaluated (Fortin and Perron, 2009).
2.1. Generic wind turbine
The investigation was carried out on a generic horizontal axis wind turbine which is based on V80-1.8 MW Vestas characteristics. This type of wind turbine is commonly used in the province of Quebec (Canada). This wind turbine is characterized by a diameter of 80 m and a rated power of 1.8 MW that corresponds to a rated wind speed of 14 m · s− 1. The minimum wind speed at which the wind turbine starts to be operational is 4 m · s− 1. The blades have a variable pitch angle that corresponds to prevailing winds. The wind turbine rotates at approximately 16 rpm (Vestas).
2.2. Blade
The generic blades have a length of 40 m and are designed to provide more power and to minimize mechanical strains and sound. Since the blade design with more efficiency is complex and costly, a simplified alternative that represents a linear variation of the chord along the span was suggested (Burton et al., 2001).
2.3. Chord
As shown in Fig. 1, at 5 m away from the hub and along the span, the chord starts with the longest value of 3.5 m and it decreases linearly along the span until reaching its minimum value of 0.5 m at the tip of the blade. The length of the chord along the span was determined based on Eq. (1). x[m] is the position along the span that varies from 5 m to 40 m.
(1)

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Chord variation along the span.

The first 5 m from the hub of the blade are not considered because of the cylindrical shape and its insignificant contribution to power production.
2.4. Airfoil
In order to substitute NACA 44xx airfoil, Danish wind turbine designers started to use NACA 63(2)-xx airfoils that showed a reduced sensitivity to leading edge roughness. According to Abbot and von Doenhoff (1959) and Hansen (2008), wind turbine blades are often designed with a profile having similar characteristics to NACA 63–415 airfoil due to its stall characteristics. This roughness that is caused by dirt and insect accumulation can decrease the power output up to 40% (Manwell et al., 2009). The leading edge is considered the zone on the blade that has the highest sensitivity to surface roughness (Jacobs, 1932, Jones and Williams, 1936).
With regard to NACA 63–415 airfoil, Fig. 2 illustrates a ratio of 0.024 that compares the diameter of a cylinder at the leading edge to the chord of the airfoil.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. NACA 63–415 airfoil.

2.5. Speed
The rotational motion of the blade's shaft at 16 rpm makes the blade's speed vary from its maximum at the tip decreasing to its minimum towards the center, as illustrated in Eq. (2). The speed U [m · s− 1] depends on the position x[m] along the span that varies from 5 m to 40 m and the rotational speed Ω.
(2)
3. Ice accretion model
The calculation of ice accretion was based on the collection of liquid water that freezes upon contact with a cylindrical object (Messinger, 1953). Eq. (3) represents the collected water mass rate of liquid water per unit surface on a cylinder.
(3)
The collected water mass rate per unit surface 
 [g · m− 2 · s− 1] depends on the liquid water content LWC [g · m− 3], the wind speed U [m · s− 1] and collection efficiency E.
The total collection efficiency E is based on Eq. (4) (Walton and Woolcock, 1960).
(4)
St is the Stokes number (Eq. (5))
(5)
U[m · s− 1] is the wind speed, MVD [μm] represents the cloud droplet medium volume diameter, ρw is the water density in [kg · m− 3] while dc represents the cylinder diameter and μa [Pa · s]is the dynamic viscosity of air which is calculated using Clift's empirical correlation (Brodkey and Hershey, 1988). Since winter stratiform clouds near ground typically are characterized with a medium volume diameter between 15 μm and 20 μm (Cober et al., 1995, Isaac, 1991), therefore the medium volume diameter (MVD) used in this study is considered to be 18 μm (Lamraoui et al., 2013).
From the Eq. (1), the ice thickness rate 
 that indicates the accumulated ice on a cylinder is represented in Eq. (6).
(6)
LWC [g · m− 3] is the supercooled liquid water content, ρice [kg · m− 3] is the ice density which is implicated in quantifying ice thickness. It was calculated using Laforte ice density (Laforte and Allaire, 1992). F represents the freezing fraction, in regard to rime ice, all the supercooled water collected freezes at impact; but for glaze ice, only a fraction of supercooled water freezes at impact (Mazin et al., 2001, Messinger, 1953).
4. Power distribution model
In order to determine the power distribution along the span, a generic blade design was considered. The estimated elementary power coefficient is defined within an elementary span dr as shown in Fig. 3 (Burton et al., 2001, Manwell et al., 2009).

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Elementary span of wind turbine.

The rotor power coefficient is dependent to the tip speed ratio λ and the axial and tangential flow induction factors a and á.
(7)
After an analytical demonstration, the resulted Eq. (8) reveals a linear increasing behavior of Cp along the span which reaches the maximum at r = R.
(8)
From Eq. (8), the elementary power coefficient ΔCp can be written as illustrated in Eqs. (11), (12), (13), (14).
(9)
(10)
Consequently, the variation of the elementary power coefficient ΔCp that corresponds to an elementary span (rb-ra)/R which is located between rb and ra is concluded by Eq. (11).
(11)
Knowing that m represents the slope, the total Power coefficient is Cp = m/2. Also 
: represent the center of the elementary area on the span.
The elementary percentage of power coefficient in each elementary division dr along the blade is calculated using the Eq. (12).
(12)
The present study investigates the effects of atmospheric icing on wind turbine blades through the quantification and the identification of ice types on the blades, therefore assessing the loss of energy along the blade.
5. Results
5.1. Power along the blade
The power production is proportional to wind speed which initiates the rotation of the blades. The uneven distribution of relative velocity along the blade generates inconstant elementary distribution of power.
Using Eqs. (12) and (20), Fig. 4 illustrates a linear increase of power coefficient starting from the root of the blade to the tip. The power generated from the first 20% of the blade is almost neglected (~ 4%), on the other hand the last 20% of the blade (36%) generates the highest power. Furthermore, an approximate 85% of the power is located in the last 60% of the radial position of the blade.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Elementary power coefficient along the span.

According to Burton et al. (2001), at the tip of the blade the lift force is almost normal to the rotor plane. The tangential component of the lift force is small and its contribution to the torque is insufficient. Consequently the power is reduced at the tip of the blades.
5.2. Water collection efficiency
According to Eq. (3), collection efficiency is an important factor that contributes in controlling the amount of accreted ice. Therefore, within similar meteorological and geometric conditions, hydrometeors with different subfreezing water droplet diameters generate different collection efficiencies along the blade. Fig. 5 shows three profiles of collection efficiency that correspond to supercooled stratus clouds (fog), supercooled drizzle and freezing rain with droplet diameters 20 μm, 200 μm and 2000 μm respectively. Due to the large size of rain drops, the water drops are all collected when at impact with the leading edge along the entire blade, as shown in Fig. 5. Except for a slight decrease of collection efficiency near the root of the blade, the drizzle droplets maintain a high collection when compared to rain droplets. Distinctively, supercooled fog droplets with a diameter of 20 μm are characterized with a collection efficiency that varies approximately from 0.09 near the root of the blade to more than 0.9 at the tip. Depending on the radial position, the rotational motion of wind turbine leads to a linear increase of relative velocity, starting from the root of the blade to the tip. The outer section of the blade has the smallest chord length and leading edge. Furthermore, Fig. 5 corroborates the fact (Eqs. (4), (5)) that higher velocity, smaller water drops and cylinder diameter all increase the droplet collection efficiency.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Collection efficiency along the blade for different droplet diameters (fog, drizzle, rain).

5.3. Ice mass rate
For the purpose of simplification, the evaporation and sublimation of liquid water masses are not considered for the calculation of the mass rate of ice accumulation. Rather, the mass rate M of icing accumulation along the blade is derived from Eq. (6) which is the calculated water mass multiplied by the freezing fraction. The water mass collected on a blade that corresponds to freezing fraction equal 1 is represented in Fig. 6. It is noticeable from Fig. 6 that ice accretion on the blade causes a very uneven mass accumulation along the blade which can lead to undesirable wind turbine vibration and fatigue.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Collected water mass rate along the blade for different liquid water contents and freezing fraction F = 1.

Fig. 6 illustrates that the maximum mass rate of ice is located on the outer section of the blade, precisely at r/R = 0.7. From this position until the tip, the maximum mass rate shows a slight decrease. Toward the opposite direction the maximum mass rate decreases significantly to reach its minimum near the blade root zone. Higher liquid water content corresponds to higher accumulation mass rates and a more accentuated peak.
The highest ice accumulation rate shown in Fig. 6 corresponds to the highest value of liquid water content 0.36 g · m− 3 followed by 0.2 g · m− 3, 0.07 g · m− 3 and 0.04 g · m− 3 respectively.
5.4. Aerodynamic effect
In order to investigate the aerodynamic effect of ice accumulation along the blade, a dimensionless thickness rate is introduced. This parameter h/c is represented by the ratio of thickness rate to chord length. The dimensionless thickness rate distribution on the blade for four liquid water contents 0.04 g · m− 3, 0.07 g · m− 3, 0.2 g · m− 3, 0.36 g · m− 3 is illustrated in Fig. 7. For different liquid water contents the thickness rate follows a similar tendency as the collection efficiency that increases towards the tip of the blade. However the gradient of thickness rate along the blade is less important for smaller values of liquid water content. The area on the blade that is most affected aerodynamically due to ice accumulation, is located approximately on the last 20% of the outer section of the blade.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Ice thickness rate along the span for different liquid water contents.

The behavior of the dimensionless thickness h/c is illustrated in Fig. 8, for a liquid content of 0.2 g · m− 3 at a wide range of subfreezing temperatures [0 °C–14 °C]. When the temperature becomes colder than − 14 °C, the dimensionless thickness reaches its maximum limit and remains unchangeable. The increase of elementary power production from the root to the tip of the blade illustrated in Fig. 4 is corroborated by the same tendency of the aerodynamic effect shown in Fig. 8. In addition, within the same position on the blade, the variation of subfreezing temperatures has an accentuated aerodynamic impact towards the tip of the blade. Consequently, ice thickness appears most pronounced along the blade where the most power is generated. An apparent inconsistency regarding the effect of temperature along the blade is also featured in Fig. 8. The aerodynamic effect is insignificant at all temperatures near the root of the blade. On the other hand, away from the root of the blade, colder temperatures manifest a larger aerodynamic response.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Aerodynamic effect along the blade for LWC = 0.2 g/m3.

5.5. Freezing fraction
In order to determine the boundary values that distinguish the wet icing processes (Glaze) from the dry icing processes (Rime), the Ludlam limit along the span for different temperatures and four liquid water contents is plotted in Fig. 9. This limit represents the temperatures at which the liquid water becomes fully frozen and the freezing fraction is equal to 1. Therefore, larger amounts of collected supercooled liquid water located at the radial positions from r/R = 0.8 to the tip of the blade require the coldest temperature to reach a complete solidification. Furthermore, the radial positions from r/R = 0.8 to the tip are characterized by a nearly similar freezing fraction. Under icing conditions with liquid water contents 0.36 m · s− 1, 0.2 m · s− 1, 0.07 m · s− 1, and 0.04 m · s− 1 and at air temperatures − 23 °C, − 13.5 °C, − 5 °C, and − 3 °C respectively, all the collected water along the blade completely freezes and forms rime ice. On the other hand, at higher temperature both rime ice and glaze are formed on the blade, with rime ice near the root of the blade, followed by glaze on the outer section of the blade. The radial position of the transition point between Rime and Glaze depends on air temperature.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Ludlam limit for different liquid water content.

Freezing fractions at different temperatures are represented on Fig. 10. The freezing fraction which is equal to 1 reflects a complete freezing of liquid water and therefore associated with rime ice. Within the subfreezing range, specifically at warmer temperatures, the collected supercooled liquid water turns into rime ice, initially near the root of the blade, while the other distant radial positions keep the supercooled liquid water partially frozen (glaze). As shown in Fig. 10, further cooling leads to an increase of rime ice which will gradually cover the entire blade. In addition, the critical effect of air temperature on freezing fraction and consequently the type of ice are demonstrated in Fig. 10. For a liquid water content of 0.2 g · m− 3 and at air temperatures between 0 °C and − 2 ° C the collected liquid water is partially frozen and forms only glaze all over the blade. With a temperature of supercooled liquid water at − 2 °C and cooler, rime ice begins to appear first in the inner section near to the root of the blade and moves progressively with decreasing temperature towards the tip. Once the temperature reaches − 13.5 °C, all the collected water becomes frozen and forms rime ice all along the blade. Partial freezing of the collected supercooled liquid water generates a runback of the unfrozen liquid water which eventually will freeze and form uneven shapes of ice. The freezing fraction 0.88 represents a critical value that brings about the most aerodynamic hazardous double horn ice shape (Fortin and Perron, 2009). For a liquid water content of 0.2 g · m− 3 the temperature − 12 °C represents the coldest temperature that maintains a freezing fraction of 0.88 located on the outer section of the blade r/R ~ [0.93 0.96].

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 10. Freezing fraction along the span for different temperatures (LWC = 0.2 g · m− 3).

5.6. Power loss
In the zone of interest on the blade which is located between the radial position r/R = 0.8 and 1, the power production represents 38% of the total production of a wind turbine. The supercooled liquid water collected in this segment of the blade requires the coldest air temperature in order to form rime ice. Within this section, the accumulated glaze on the blade reshapes the airfoil resulting in higher aerodynamic degradation. Decreasing temperature as shown in Fig. 9, Fig. 10 indicates that the radial position r/R ~ [0.93 0.96] is the last position where collected water becomes rime ice on the blade. In order to quantify production degradation, the power loss factor f is introduced. The values of the power loss factor f reflect the normalized variations of power requirements for rotor blade helicopters under icing conditions.
(13)
Cp' represents power coefficient under icing effect. The power loss factor f is derived from the effect of ice on helicopter power requirements introduced by Fortin and Perron (2009). Contrary to helicopters that require power to rotate, wind turbines rotate to produce power.
For rotor blade of helicopters ice accumulation necessitates an increase of the provided power to maintain the rotation frequency. On the other hand, ice accumulation on wind turbines reduces the expected power production. Therefore the power coefficient for clean wind turbine blades is divided by the power loss factor f in order to obtain the power coefficient under icing conditions.
The power loss factor f, as shown in Fig. 11a and b, reflects the aerodynamic degradation and power loss which depends on the freezing fraction that determines the ice shape. This factor intervenes only at subfreezing temperatures starting with a value 1 at 0 °C which corresponds to a clean blade. Beyond a value of 1, the power loss factor f follows a linear increase until it reaches its maximum value at 4.4. This peak value is associated with the freezing fraction 0.88 that corresponds to the double horn ice shape which is the most aerodynamically hazardous situation. Further cooling is associated with an increase in freezing fraction and a slight decrease of the power loss factor f until it reaches the minimum value of 3.3. At this minimum, the freezing fraction is equal to 1 and all the supercooled liquid water becomes fully frozen and forms rime ice. The power loss factor that indicates the maximum energy degradation at the radial position r/R ~ [0.93 0.96] is accordingly applicable for all liquid water contents. Fig. 11b illustrates power loss factor for liquid water contents of 0.04 g · m− 3, 0.07 g · m− 3, 0.2 g · m− 3, and 0.36 g · m− 3 that corresponds to the maximum aerodynamic degradation at temperatures − 2.6 °C, − 4.5 °C, − 12 °C, and − 20 °C respectively, and forming rime ice at temperatures − 3 °C, − 5 °C, − 13.5 °C, and − 23 °C respectively. According to the variation of power loss factor in Fig. 11b, the higher liquid water contents are featured with larger ranges of temperatures where the power loss caused by glaze is significant.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 11. Aerodynamic reduction factor (a) Power loss vs freezing fraction (b) Power loss vs temperature for different liquid water contents.

The radial position r/R ~ [0.93 0.96] that belongs to the outer section of the blade brings about the largest power production. Simultaneously, the freezing fraction 0.88 is associated with the double horn ice shape that imposes the highest aerodynamic degradation. For these reasons, Fig. 12 shows how a particular focus on power production is achieved within these conditions.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 12. Power loss at r/R ~ [0.93 0.96] for different liquid water contents.

The degradation of elementary power coefficient Cp versus the temperature at the radial position r/R ~ [0.93 0.96], for four values of liquid water contents; 0.04, 0.07, 0.2, and 0.36 g · m− 3 is shown in Fig. 12. Power coefficient decreases with decreasing temperature until it reaches its lower limit that corresponds to the critical freezing fraction of 0.88, then it increases slightly to reach a constant value to form rime ice when the freezing fraction is equal to 1. With liquid water content 0.2 g · m− 3, one notices that power production decreases until its minimum that corresponds to temperature − 12 °C and a freezing fraction 0.88. Colder than − 12 °C, freezing fraction increases and it generates a slight increase in power until reaching a freezing fraction 1 when at which point the dry growth regime starts. The depletion of power coefficient in Fig. 12 is reached only if enough ice is accumulated on the blade. Also, the behavior of power coefficient in Fig. 12 pictures shows the response of wind turbine production loss to geometrical and meteorological icing conditions. For this calculation it is assumed that the icing event duration is long enough to generate the critical ice shape. The upper half of the blade is more affected by icing due to the partial freezing. With regard to liquid water content of 0.2 g · m− 3 and a temperature of − 12 °C, the power degradation appears under all icing types (rime and glaze). As shown in Fig. 10, starting from a radial position near r/R = 0.72 that corresponds to the beginning of glaze, the magnitude of power degradation increases gradually and becomes more accentuated at its lower level which is located approximately at r/R ~ [0.93 0.96].
The amount of accumulated ice depends on the duration of ice accretion. According to Fortin and Perron (2009), the highest power loss for the subscaled iced helicopter's blades was reached after 160 s of ice accretion, the relative speed of the blade at the radial position r/R ~ [0.93 0.96] was about 130 m · s− 1 and a liquid water content of 0.84 g · m− 3. Accumulation parameter A presented in Eq. (14) (Anderson and Tsao, 2005) is utilized, in order to estimate the duration required for ice accretion on wind turbine blades to reach a similar ice shape (hazardous double horn).
(14)
A: Accumulation parameter, E: total collection efficiency, U: relative speed, t: icing event duration, C: chord.
The indexes wt, h refer to wind turbine and helicopter respectively. For the same freezing fractions, collection efficiencies and accumulation parameters (AwtAh), the duration required for ice accretion on the blade of a turbine is represented in Eq. (15) and Fig. 13 that correspond to different liquid water contents:
(15)

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 13. Required duration for ice accretion on wind turbines to match the same highest power loss under icing conditions on helicopter's blades (freezing fraction 0.88, r/R = [0.93 0.96]) for different liquid water contents.

Higher liquid water contents correspond to shorter required icing duration to reach higher power loss. In reference to the subscaled helicopter's rotor blade (Fortin and Perron, 2009), Fig. 13 illustrates the required duration for ice accretion on wind turbines to match the same or the highest power loss under icing conditions on the helicopter's blades (freezing fraction 0.88, r/R = [0.93 0.96]) for different liquid water contents.
As illustrated in Fig. 13, for liquid water contents 0.04 g · m− 3, 0.07 g · m− 3, 0.2 g · m− 3, and 0.36 g · m− 3 the durations needed to reach the hazardous double horn ice shapes are 13.2 h, 7.5 h, 2.6 h and 1.5 h respectively. In addition, icing events with liquid water contents smaller than 0.04 g · m− 3 are excluded from forming double horn ice shapes with a freezing fraction of 0.88.
In order to evaluate the required duration of icing events, the results from Fig. 13 are compared to realistic icing events. The use of North American Regional Reanalysis (NARR) allowed a climate investigation of in-cloud icing near surface level, during a 32 year period from 1979 until 2010. As shown in Fig. 14, from these reanalysis over the site of Mont-Belair (Canada), the duration of icing events and the corresponding supercooled liquid water contents are estimated according to a previous study done by Lamraoui et al. (2013). The calculation of the 32-year average that corresponds to the occurrence of icing events enables finding the typical durations for each range of supercooled liquid water contents of 0.04 ± 0.02 g · m− 3, 0.07 ± 0.02 g · m− 3, 0.2 ± 0.02 g · m− 3, and 0.36 ± 0.02 g · m− 3. The longer durations of icing event are associated with a smaller supercooled liquid water contents.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 14. Monthly duration of icing events from reanalysis over Mont-Belair site during January (from 1979 to 2010).

The 32-year averages of the duration of icing events are introduced in Table 1. The results demonstrated in Table 1 characterize the climatology of atmospheric icing of the Mont-Belair site located near Quebec City (Canada). The values of liquid water contents in Fig. 14 and Table 1 delineate five severity classes (Lamraoui et al., 2013). The comparison of icing event durations from Fig. 13 and Table 1 shows that all icing severity ranges endure enough to fulfill the requirement of forming the double horn hazardous ice shape.
Table 1. Duration of icing events from reanalysis: 32-year icing climate.

Supercooled liquid water content (g · m− 3)	Average duration of icing event period: 1979–2010 over Mont-Belair
0.04 ± 0.02	~ 43 h
0.07 ± 0.02	~ 24 h
0.20 ± 0.02	~ 6 h
0.36 ± 0.02	~ 4 h
The freezing fraction of 0.88 corresponds to the largest aerodynamic degradation. Therefore, the starting temperature that coincides with the occurrence of ice accretion along the blade with freezing fraction only 0.88 and beyond corresponds to the maximum power loss. For a liquid water content 0.2 g · m− 3, the maximum power loss happens at temperature − 12 °C. Under these meteorological conditions, the radial position r/R ~ [0.93 0.96] holds an ice with a freezing fraction of 0.88. Elsewhere on the blade the freezing fraction exceeds 0.88 and varies accordingly to reach 1.
The electrical power loss due to icing conditions is represented in Fig. 15. The maximum electric power degradation that wind turbines can reach under icing effects is obtained by involving the modified power coefficient Cp′ from Eq. (13). More specifically, Fig. 15(b) represents the quantification of power loss for different wind speed when the liquid water content is 0.2 g · m− 3 and air temperature equivalent to − 12 °C. Under these geometrical and meteorological conditions, the maximum power production loss occurs when wind speed is approximately around 10.5 m · s− 1. At the temperature of − 13.5 °C, only rime ice is accreted all along the blade, showing power degradation.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 15. Power under icing effects for LWC = 0.2 g · m− 3 at T = − 12 °C and T = − 13.5 °C, (a) Power curve with and without icing (b) Percentage of electrical power loss.

The temperature of − 12 °C engenders only rime ice on the radial positions from the root until r/R ~ 0.72. Beyond this position to the tip of the blade, only glaze is accreted with a different freezing fraction. From the result represented in Fig. 15, one concludes that a slight change in temperature can provoke a change in power loss. Within a range of wind speed ~ [7 m · s− 1 17 m · s− 1], a small decrease in temperature (ΔT ~ 1.5 °C) generates a significant reduction of power production that can reach its maximum of 0.8% with a wind speed of 10.5 m · s− 1. Under icing conditions, both temperatures − 12 °C and − 13.5 °C correspond to significant maximum power production degradation of approximately 40%.
6. Analysis
Since the rotational motion of the blade generates a varying relative velocity that increase from zero at the root of the blade to its maximum at the tip, consequently the elementary power is distributed unevenly along the blade. The power production extracted from the first quarter of the blade near the root is practically neglected. Except for the tip, the blade aerodynamic is greatly influenced by the outer section. The obtained result as shown in Fig. 4, demonstrates that 85% of the produced power is originated from the outer 60% segment of the blade.
From the simplified cylinder model used in this study, the collection efficiency involved in quantifying ice accretion varies mainly according cylinder diameter, and droplet diameter of supercooled hydrometeors. Considering all ranges of supercooled hydrometeors, with larger droplet diameters (≥ 200 μm) that are associated with freezing drizzle or rain, the collection efficiency is approximately consistent and not affected by the geometry variation along the blade. On the other hand, as illustrated in Fig. 5 supercooled fog or supercooled cloud has a substantial variation of collection efficiency between both edges of the blade. The outer section of the blade that coincides with a higher aerodynamic is characterized with the highest collection efficiency that is comparable to freezing rain or drizzle.
The rate of ice thickness and the rate of the ratio of thickness to chord as show in Fig. 7, Fig. 8 respectively corroborate the fact that the outer section of the blade considerably influence the aerodynamics of the blade and is the least ice-phobic segment on the blade.
The freezing faction is a very important parameter that substantially influences the type and the shape of accreted ice on the blade. As illustrated in Fig. 9, the fact that higher liquid water contents associated with higher latent heat requires colder temperature to reach the complete solidification of collected supercooled liquid water. When temperature decreases as indicated in Fig. 9, Fig. 10, rime ice starts to appear first near the root then gradually continues to spread towards the tip of the blade.
Blade's Airfoils are sensitively designed to allow a smooth flow of air over the top and bottom surfaces and when ice accumulation occurs it then alters the shape of airfoil. The geometry of a blade's airfoil is crucial to the aerodynamics of wind turbines and consequently for power production. Rime ice follows the shape of the airfoil, however the glaze shape can be very irregular depending upon the freezing fraction. When ice first accumulates it has no serious effect, but gradually it builds forward and along the top and bottom surfaces of airfoil and causes more hazard. When the blade of a wind turbine strikes supercooled water droplets, the leading edge becomes covered with a film of supercooled water that freezes from inside out. Clear ice (glaze) which forms rapidly can represent the most hazardous form of all icing conditions, whereas rime ice forms slowly. At the beginning, the ice build-up follows the blade's airfoil. Once it reaches the points of maximum camber, the shape of airfoil changes drastically. Consequently the air flow becomes disrupted which generates drag increase, and reduced lift. From an experimental study (Fortin and Perron, 2009) the freezing fraction of 0.88 is proven to generate the most aerodynamically hazardous ice shape (double horn). This freezing fraction and a normalized power variation from a helicopter's rotor blade were used to introduce a new power loss factor to assess power degradation subjected to ice accretion. This power loss factor is introduced in Fig. 11a and b. For each elementary radial position along the blade, the freezing fraction zero corresponds to no-ice condition. The collected supercooled liquid water starts to freeze with increasing freezing fraction and decreasing the temperature until reaching the peak of power loss that corresponds to the freezing fraction of 0.88. As shown in Fig. 11b, the temperature required to reach the maximum loss varies according to the value of liquid water content. Once the maximum power loss is achieved, an additional cooling will generate lesser power loss. Radial position of r/R ~ [0.93 0.96] corresponds to the most critical freezing fraction on the blade.
Under the same meteorological conditions, the critical zone on the blade is limited to a small section where potentially the double horn ice shape would form with a freezing fraction of 0.88. Therefore, Fig. 12 demonstrates power degradation of the critical temperatures for 4 values of liquid water contents 0.04 g · m − 3, 0.07 g · m − 3, 0.2 g · m − 3, and 0.36 g · m − 3. By matching the accumulation parameters from a subscaled helicopter rotor blade with wind turbine blade helps determine the required duration of icing events that leads to the formation of the double horn ice shape. The variation of this recommended duration is presented in Fig. 13. Within the range of liquid water content used for this study, the duration of icing events needed to form a double horn ice shape varies between 1.5 h and 13 h. As an attempt to verify whether these critical durations correspond to realistic icing events, the current study refers to a reliable set of historical meteorological database details from the North American Regional Reanalysis (NARR).
The analysis of data from North American Regional Reanalysis at a climate scale that spanned 32 years during January demonstrated that less intense icing events had smaller liquid water content and were associated with prolonged occurrences of icing events.
During very intense icing events with a short period of occurrences, the optimum alternative for wind turbines is to stop turning, in order to minimize ice accumulation. The results obtained from reanalysis in Table 1 demonstrate that intense icing events last up to 6 h. On the other hand, light icing events that can exceed 2 days, this can present prolonged power degradation and serious hazardous conditions for the wind turbine industry. In addition, Fig. 5 illustrates that smaller droplets target the most aerodynamically critical zone on the blade which is located in the outer section. Therefore, shorter occurrences of icing events that correspond to higher intensity with larger droplet diameters are less harmful.
The critical freezing fraction 0.88 that corresponds to the double horn ice shape occurs locally within a limited segment on the blade. Once freezing fractions along the blade reaches 0.88 or higher, the wind turbine indicates the maximum of power degradation. This scenario corresponds to glaze accumulation located on r/R ~ [0.93 0.96] and rime ice elsewhere on the blade.
The power output shown in Fig. 15 which originated from clean and iced blades reveal that regardless of the type of ice, the power production degradation is still significant and can reach ~ 40% of the expected power production.
The critical glaze contributes slightly to power loss with an approximate amount of ~ 0.8%, because of the limited area where the double horn ice shape forms in relation to the entire blade.
7. Conclusion
The present study determines power production loss, due to the accumulation of ice along the blades of wind turbines. The investigation is based on cylinder model and power loss model. The power degradation model is based on the results of a previous study that was done on a sub-scaled helicopter rotor blade.
The approach depends on the assumption that a wind turbine remains continually operational, regardless the severity of icing events. Along the blade, the results show that both mass and thickness of accreted ice on the leading edge increase gradually with decreasing the chord size. The results show that 85% of power production is generated from the section on the blade that is located in the last 60% of the blade towards the tip. As well, the results enable the identification of the localized radial position that starts from r/R = 0.8 to the tip of the blade and corresponds to the highest aerodynamic degradation and consequently power production loss. According to the size of the leading edge, the air temperature, the liquid water content and the freezing fraction vary along the blade resulting in different ice types and shapes. Regardless of the type of ice, power production loss under icing conditions can reach a maximum of 40% at a specific wind speed.
Locally and within the same radial position, it is the shape rather than the thickness of ice that causes more icing hazards. The double horn shaped ice propels the highest aerodynamic degradation. This ice geometry corresponds to the freezing fraction of 0.88. In addition, from power loss model, the peak of the local power loss is associated with freezing fraction of 0.88 which represents only a portion of wet growth regime. The coexistence of both wet and dry ice simultaneously on the blade, and the limited radial section that has a critical freezing fraction, minimize the effect of local double horn shaped ice formation and of power production loss on the entire from the whole wind turbine. Therefore, there is only a slight difference of approximately 0.8% in total power production loss caused by the existence of a confined critical wet ice along the blade, when compared to only dry ice. Typical icing event durations at climate scale obtained from reanalysis confirm that all icing events with all intensities persist enough to reach the hazardous freezing fraction.
Also, icing events with high intensities correspond to shorter durations of occurrence. On the other hand, less intense icing events had smaller liquid water content and were associated with prolonged occurrences of icing events.;light intensities events are associated to long-lasting icing events.
Based on the obtained results of this study, it can be useful to set up a cost effective ice-protection system. Regarding this system, it is recommended to cover only 60% of the blade. This would optimize power production under icing conditions. Also, this system can be equipped with a sensor located at the radial position r/R = 0.4 or higher toward the tip. This sensor can then trigger the ice-protection system upon detection of a critical freezing fraction at this radial position.