One possible next leap in human space exploration for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
is a mission to a near Earth asteroid (NEA). In order to achieve such an ambitious goal, a space habitat will need to
accommodate a crew of four for the 380-day round trip. The Human Spaceflight Architecture Team (HAT)
developed a conceptual design for such a habitat. The team identified activities that would be performed inside a
long-duration, deep space habitat, and the capabilities needed to support such a mission. A list of seven functional
activities/capabilities was developed: individual and group crew care, spacecraft and mission operations, subsystem
equipment, logistics and resupply, and contingency operations. The volume for each activity was determined using
NASA STD-3001 and the companion Human Integration Design Handbook (HIDH). Although, the sum of these
volumes produced an over-sized spacecraft, the team evaluated activity frequency and duration to identify functions
that could share a common volume without conflict, reducing the total volume by 24%. After adding 10% for
growth, the resulting functional pressurized volume was calculated to be a minimum of 268 m3
(9,464 ft3
) distributed
over the functions. The work was validated through comparison to Mir, Skylab, the International Space Station
(ISS), Bigelow Aerospace’s proposed habitat module, and NASA’s Trans-Hab concept. Using HIDH guidelines, the
team developed an internal layout that (a) minimized the transit time between related crew stations, (b)
accommodated expected levels of activity at each station, (c) isolated stations when necessary for health, safety,
performance, and privacy, and (d) provided a safe, efficient, and comfortable work and living environment.
I. BACKGROUND
Spacecraft design is an iterative process, requiring a
conceptual design of some sort as a starting point. This
initial starting point is often an educated guess, but it
provides a framework for designers to make informed
choices.
The Exploration Mission Systems Office (EMSO) at
the NASA Johnson Space Center was asked to develop
a conceptual layout design for a Deep Space Habitat
(DSH) module. Working from this conceptual design,
specialty teams would then develop detailed subsystem
designs. After integrating the subsystems together, the
design concept would be modified if necessary, and the
process would continue through several rounds of
design refinements. The purpose of this paper is to
outline the methodology and logic used to develop the
initial design concept.
I.I Design Reference Mission
The team was directed to work to Design Reference
Mission Hybrid 2 with High Apogee Highly Elliptical
Orbit (HEO) Aggregation and Low Apogee HEO Crew
Rendezvous. For the purpose of this exercise, it was
assumed that the mission destination was a Near Earth
Object requiring 157 days transit from Earth, followed
by 30 days at the Near Earth Object, and a 193 day
return to Earth, for a crewed mission duration of 380
days. The DSH module would be launched as much as
825 days before the crew arrived. Both 3- and 4-crew
missions were proposed, but the team assumed a 4-crew
mission, as this was the worst case in terms of sizing
scenario.
I.II Constraints
 DSH diameter was originally targeted at 4 to 7.5 m
(13.12 to 24.6 ft), though it was thought that the
dynamic envelope could accommodate some incursion
up to 7.6 m (24.93 ft) diameter. Although the launch
shroud diameter was not explicitly defined, it was
thought that the transport vehicle could accommodate a
payload up to 12 m (39.37 ft) in length.
I.III Habitat Interfaces
The DSH was intended to be part of an integrated
vehicle, shown in Figure 1, which also includes a Solar
Electric Propulsion (SEP) module; a Cryogenic
Propulsion Stage (CPS); a Multi-Mission Space
Exploration Vehicle (MMSEV); and a Multi Purpose
Crew Vehicle (MPCV), also known as Orion.
Note that MMSEV and Orion would be accessible
during the out-bound journey, but the MMSEV would
remain at the destination, therefore, it would not be
available during the return voyage.
II. GENERAL ASSUMPTIONS
For this exercise, a number of general assumptions
were made in collaboration with subsystem subject
matter experts. 
GLEX-2012.05.3.8x12222 Page 2 of 10
Fig. 1: Integrated Vehicle Stack.
II.I Docking Ports
Given the integrated vehicle architecture shown in
Figure 1, DSH must be able to dock with the SEP,
Orion, and an MMSEV. Additionally, it was assumed
that DSH must have one contingency docking port for a
total of 4 Docking Systems.
II.II Hatches
The DSH must have crew transfer hatches to both
Orion and the MMSEV. Additionally, it was assumed
that DSH must have one contingency EVA hatch, for a
total of 3 hatches. Further, it was assumed that the DSH
contingency EVA hatch must be sized to accommodate
EVA pressure-suited crew, and a large piece of external
equipment to pass through for shirt-sleeve repair and
maintenance inside the DSH.
II.III MMSEV/Orion
It was assumed that minimal power would be
provided for Orion and MMSEV keep-alive functions
during the out-bound journey. Except for emergency
safe haven use, it was assumed that the Orion and
MMSEV would only be used for temporary equipment
stowage and not habitation, while the integrated vehicle
was in transit.
II.IV Equipment Racks
For the purpose of estimating equipment volumes,
each DSH equipment rack was assumed to be the same
volume as a standard International Space Station (ISS)
rack, 1.571 m3
(55.48 ft3
). This is not to say that ISS
racks would necessarily be used, only that DSH racks
would be roughly the same volume as their ISS
counterparts to provide a starting point for design.
II.V Module Diameter
Because radiation exposure is thought to be one of
the highest crew risks for a lengthy mission, crew
protection must be factored into habitat design. A large
diameter module allows designers to place more
equipment between the crew and the habitat outer shell,
helping to shield the crew. On the other hand, prior
experience cautions against too large a diameter, as this
will drive ground-handling, transportation, and test
costs. A 7.3 m (23.95 ft) maximum launched outer
diameter module could be accommodated by existing
transportation aircraft and test facilities. The team also
assumed at least 30 cm (11.8 in) was needed between
the module outer shell diameter and the inner shroud
dynamic envelope to accommodate micrometeoroidorbital debris shield stand-offs1
. This gap could also be
used for other externally mounted equipment such as
antennas, power cables, or fluid lines. Therefore the
team decided on a 7.0 m (22.97 ft) maximum launched
outer diameter module.
III. INTERIOR DESIGN APPROACH
The Team began by identifying the activities or
capabilities needed for a long-duration, deep space
mission. Next, the volume required for each
activity/capability was calculated based on NASA
standards and requirements using NASA Standard
3001, Vol. 2: Human Factors, Habitability, and
Environmental Health2
. Details on how much volume to
provide for various activities are given in the
companion Human Integration Design Handbook
(HIDH)3
.
In an attempt to optimize volume, the frequency and
duration of each activity was examined to identify
functions that could share the same volume without
conflict. Based on this assessment, the team
brainstormed internal layouts that would: (a) minimize
the transit time between related crew stations; (b)
accommodate expected levels of activity at each station;
(c) isolate areas when necessary for health, safety,
performance, and privacy; and (d) provide a safe,
efficient, and comfortable work and living environment.
IV. FUNCTIONAL ACTIVITIES/CABABILITIES
As a descriptor, the term ―functional‖ means the
ability to perform an activity at an optimal level of
performance. Therefore, functional activities are those
tasks that are not hindered by the design or architecture
of the habitat. The team developed seven functional
activity or capability categories that the DSH was
expected to accommodate: individual crew care; group
crew care; spacecraft operations; mission operations;
subsystem equipment; logistics and resupply; and
contingencies. Generally speaking, these seven
categories could be applied to almost any spacecraft,
but within each category the team developed a detailed
list of activities/capabilities specific to this DSH
mission.
The functional volume required for individual line
items was then calculated using two pieces of
information: (1) the volume of the hardware required to
support that particular activity/capability, as estimated 
GLEX-2012.05.3.8x12222 Page 3 of 10
by the subsystems; and (2) the body volume(s) of the
crew(s) performing the activity (if applicable), per the
HIDH. For example, an exercise treadmill requires
approximately one rack of equipment, 1.571 m3
(55.48
ft3
), but the HIDH recommends an additional 6.12 m
3
(216.1 ft3
) of free volume above the treadmill deck to
accommodate the exercising crew member (Figure 2).
Fig. 2: Treadmill Crew Exercise Envelope.
IV.I Individual Crew Care
Individual crew care activities were those that
required some level of privacy and were therefore
evaluated separately from group activities. Individual
crew care activities included: full body cleansing;
routine hand/face cleansing; exercise; personal hygiene;
urination/defecation; sleep; personal recreation/leisure;
clothing maintenance; dressing and undressing; and
private medical care.
The team estimated a total volume of 59.2 m
3
(2090.6 ft3
) for all individual crew care activities and
capabilities. This included medical and exercise
equipment, and a waste/hygiene compartment, based on
ISS historical volumes, plus full body cleansing,
individual crew quarters, personal item storage, and a
small desk area estimated using HIDH guidelines.
IV.II Group Crew Care
Group activities and capabilities were expected to
occupy contiguous volumes that could support more
than one activity. Group crew functions included meal
preparation, group meals, meal cleanup, and group
recreation/leisure.
The team estimated a total volume of 38.4 m
3
(1,356
ft3
) for Group activities/capabilities. This included a
meal preparation and clean-up area; a group dining
table; and an area for recreational activities, all based on
HIDH guidelines.
IV.III Spacecraft Operations
Spacecraft Operations were defined as tasks that
need to be done regardless of specific mission
objectives or destinations. These included general
housekeeping; maintenance and repair; subsystem
monitoring and control; integrated stack command and
control; and mated element docking/command and data
interface.
The team estimated a total volume of 64 m
3
(2,260
ft3
) for Spacecraft Operations. At 10.91 m
3
(385.3 ft3
)
Maintenance and Repair was the largest single
Spacecraft Operations activity volume; the team
assumed the maintenance area must accommodate two
crew body volumes, plus a work bench, a rack-sized
item to be repaired, and a large commercial tool box.
Each remaining spacecraft operations function was
assumed to require a dedicated equipment rack or
console plus at least one (and in some cases two) crew
body volumes in front of the console. Note that general
housekeeping consumables were book-kept under
Logistics and Resupply, but cleaning equipment (such
as a portable vacuum cleaner) was accounted for in this
category.
IV.IV Mission Operations
Mission Operations are those tasks specific to a
particular mission, destination, or science objective,
such as meetings, planning/scheduling, Orion or
MMSEV crew transfer, extravehicular activity (EVA);
pre/post EVA Operations, intra-vehicular activity
support of EVA, proximity operations, training, payload
support, life sciences experiments, and materials
processing experiments.
The team estimated a total volume of 63.9 m
3
(2,257
ft3
) for Mission Operations. Although relatively large
volumes were estimated for activities such as group
meetings or life sciences experiments, the team found
that these volumes did not require dedicated areas, and
could share volume with other activities. For example,
group meetings could occur in the group meal area, and
life science experiments could share volume with
medical operations.
IV.V Subsystem Equipment
A distinction was made between the actual
subsystem equipment (which would likely be
distributed around the habitat) and subsystem control
consoles (which may be consolidated in a central
command area). Spacecraft subsystems typically
include environmental control and life support (ECLS),
thermal control, power, EVA, command and data
handling (C&DH), guidance, navigation and control
(GN&C), structures, mechanisms, propulsion, human
factors, and communications and telemetry (C&T). For
the purpose of this exercise it was assumed that all
propulsion function would reside in the attached
modules, therefore no volume was allocated in the DSH
for propulsion subsystem equipment. Even if this
assumption were to be revisited in a final design
implementation, very little propulsion subsystem
equipment would likely be housed inside the DSH cabin 
GLEX-2012.05.3.8x12222 Page 4 of 10
and would thus have very little impact on internal
layout.
In lieu of detailed subsystem designs, the team
estimated a preliminary Subsystem Equipment volume
of 71.7 m
3
(2,532 ft3
) by looking to the ISS’s
Laboratory and Quest Airlock Modules for functional
volume equivalents. It was assumed that DSH EVA
equipment needs would be roughly equivalent to
Quest’s 34 m
3
(1,201 ft3
) equipment volume, which
includes volume to stow space suits, support equipment,
and EVA tools. This may be an overly conservative
estimate, since DSH must only support contingency
EVA activities. However, until detailed subsystem
designs are available to inform the scope and
probability of various contingencies, this volume
assumption provided a logical starting point.
Non-EVA subsystem volume was assumed to be
roughly equivalent to the 37.7 m
3
(1,331 ft3
) dedicated
to the 24 equipment racks in ISS’s Destiny Laboratory
Module. The team intended to revise these numbers
after subsystem designs were refined.
IV.VI Logistics and Resupply
The long duration of a DSH mission will drive
stowage volume for consumable, non-regenerative
items. The team estimated a total volume of 20.02 m
3
(707 ft3
) for food and water, clothing, medicine,
subsystem spares, and other consumables, such as filters
or wipes. More than a quarter of the stowage volume is
comprised of food. Stowage volume was estimated in
terms of Cargo Transfer Bags (CTB), which are about
0.0681 m3
(2.4 ft
3
) volume, and ISS-equivalent rack
volumes, as noted previously.
Food, water, clothing, and medical supply volume
estimates were based on historical ISS values.
Spares/resupply volume estimates were provided by the
Human Factors, Power, and GN&C subsystems; in lieu
of detailed estimates from the remaining subsystems,
the team allocated one equipment rack’s worth of
volume to each of the remaining subsystems for spares
and consumables. Although this is likely an
overestimate for some subsystems (C&T, for example)
it is likely an underestimate for other subsystems (such
as ECLS). Note that water used for crew radiation
protection was book-kept under the Contingencies
category, rather than as a consumable.
To gain a sense of the consumables volume—as well
as the resulting waste volume generated by
consumption of these items—on a long-duration
mission, select examples calculated by the Human
Factors team are presented.
Food and Drinks
Unlike current ISS missions, fresh food will not be
resupplied during a DSH mission. The long
unmanned loiter period before the crew arrives will
also drive shelf life requirements of the foods
provided to the crew.
According to the NASA Johnson Space Center’s
Food Lab, ISS food requirements are based on a
minimum caloric intake per day (approximately
3000 calories) 3
. Four crew members each eating 3
meals per day for 380 days will require
approximately 4,560 meals. Meals are made up of an
assortment of thermostabilized, rehydratable, and
bite-size foods. Figure 3 shows food stowage in a
CTB which typically holds about 27 meals.
Assuming each crew member will also consume up
to five flavored drinks per day (coffee, tea, etc.), a
total of 7,600 dehydrated drink powder bags will
also be required.
Fig. 3: A crew transport bag with food packed
inside.
Clothing Packaging and Volume
On ISS, crewmembers are issued one pair of
shorts and a t-shirt for every three exercise days.
Crew work shirts and pants/shorts are changed, on
average, once every 10 days. Crewmembers
generally use a new T-shirt to wear under their work
shirts every 10 days. Underwear and socks are
changed every other day, but thicker socks, which
are worn if a crewmember's feet get cold, must last a
month. Crew members are also issued two sweaters.
In addition, each crew member receives one pair of
running shoes to use on the treadmill and another
pair of shoes to wear when using the exercise
bicycle.
On average, a single CTB holds about 2 weeks of
ISS clothing, not including socks and underwear
(see Figure 4). Unlike ISS, which has the luxury of
regular resupply flights, a long duration DSH
mission would require higher efficiency clothing
packaging than currently used for ISS. For example
the use of vacuum-sealed bags which can reduce
volume by up to 80% would allow approximately 5
weeks of clothing to be stowed in a single CTB.
Another suggested strategy for long duration
missions is for work clothing to be worn until it is
soiled, and then used for exercise until it is disposed 
GLEX-2012.05.3.8x12222 Page 5 of 10
of. Recent strides in the development of lowervolume materials used for disposable clothing also
promise future mass and volume reductions, though
it should be noted that these fabrics are not yet
certified to meet the flammability and off-gassing
standards for spacecraft use.
Fig. 4: A CTB with 2 weeks of clothing.
Waste Management Supplies
Waste generated on a long duration mission
poses a number of questions. For example, should
waste be discarded or recycled for other purposes?
One interesting idea is to melt food package waste
and compress into plastic bricks to serve as crew
radiation protection. On the other hand, this would
require DSH to carry additional equipment and
increase power loads. Although the baseline
assumption for this exercise was to discard waste
generated during the outbound trip with the
jettisoned MMSEV, future trade analyses should
evaluate the costs and benefits of recycled waste.
It was assumed that trash volume created during
the mission would be roughly equivalent to
consumable volume (food, wet wipes, etc.) depleted.
Therefore, for the purpose of this exercise, trash
volume does not contribute to the overall cabin
volume calculation. That said, it should be noted
that trash can not necessarily be returned to the same
stowage location that its constituent consumables
once occupied so, in practice, a dedicated staging
area may be required.
There are two types of human waste containers,
one for urine and wastewater collection and another
for solid waste. With a liquid reclamation system,
current urine/wastewater containers have a life of
about 90-days. With proper compression of waste,
current solid waste containers can be used 21 times.
Using current equipment, a 380-day mission with 4
crew would need about 5 urine/wastewater
containers and approximately 108 solid waste
containers. This does not include estimates for urine
hoses and filter inserts, which were included as part
of the ECLS subsystem spares volume.
Hygiene Supplies
Hygiene supplies include personal items such as
toothpaste and hand/face wipes, but also group items
such as antibacterial wipes and biocidal cleanser.
Currently on ISS, there are several different wipes
that support housekeeping: dry, durable, detergent,
disinfectant, and utensil wipes. There is no limit on
the usage rate for dry and durable wipes, however,
for detergent and disinfectant the usage rate is about
6 of each per crewmember per day and 3 utensil
wipes are used per person per day. There are 50 dry
wipes per package and 30 per package for all others.
To place in perspective, for a 380-day mission, the
minimum number of dry wipes used would be
around 15,200 or 304 packages.
On ISS each person is allotted 1 wet towel and 2
dry towels per day which would require a total of
4,560 towels during the DSH mission. DSH is
assumed to have a full body wash compartment, but
it is unknown how this would affect the number of
towels needed. Additional volume is required for
other hygiene supplies such as toothpaste,
deodorant, lotion, and shampoo. Electric razors
would probably be used rather than straight razors
and shaving cream, but an electric razor would
require a vacuum cleaner.

IV.VII Contingencies
The team evaluated the functional volume required
to address a number of possible contingency scenarios.
These included fire, toxic atmosphere, cabin
depressurization, radiation events, and crew fatality.
The team estimated a total volume of 5.4 m
3
(190.7
ft3
) for contingencies, with the bulk of the volume being
shared with other areas.
V. TOTAL FUNCTIONAL VOLUME
Using the numbers outlined above, and before taking
into account shared volumes, the total functional
volume was found to be 322.65 m
3
(11,394 ft3
),
distributed across the seven functional categories as
shown in Figure 5.
Fig. 5: Total Functional Activity Volume Distribution.
GLEX-2012.05.3.8x12222 Page 6 of 10
As expected, Logistics/Resupply and Contingency
functions require considerably less volume than
Subsystem Equipment, Crew Care, or Mission and
Spacecraft Operations.
VI. ACTIVITY FREQUENCY AND DURATION
Once the functional activity list was established, the
team made engineering judgements about the expected
frequency and duration of each activity. This
information would then be used to determine which
activities could share the same volume without conflict.
Some activities, such as EVA, require a stationary,
dedicated functional volume for technical reasons.
Other activities, such as stowage, also require a
dedicated volume, but can move around the habitat as
needed (e.g., food resupply in the galley). Many
activities do not require either a dedicated or a
stationary volume and can share space with other
activities, particularly if the two functions occur at
different times of the day. For example, a group dining
area would lend itself well to also hosting planning
meetings or group recreational activities. Frequent or
long-duration activities often require larger volumes to
accommodate crew comfort and safety, although this is
not always the case. For example, maintenance of large
items may be a rare contingency, but would require a
relatively large area.
VII. SHARED VOLUME ASSESSMENT
In addition to the frequency and duration
information, the team categorized location (stationary or
moveable) and whether a function required a dedicated
volume. Obvious candidates for shared volumes were
noted. After taking into account shared volumes, the
total required volume dropped 24% to 244.2 m
3
(8,623.8 ft3
), distributed as shown in Figure 6 (cf.,
Figure 5).
Fig. 6: Shared Functional Activity Volume Distribution.
VIII. MODULE LENGTH
To arrive at a module length, the team added 10% to
the 244.2 m3
(8,623.8 ft3
) shared volume to account for
internal structural elements (such as floor thickness) and
―unknown unknowns‖ due to the low fidelity of the
design. This resulted in a minimum pressurized volume
of 268.6 m3
(9,486 ft3
) to accommodate all anticipated
DSH activities. Assuming elliptical end caps, a 7 m
(22.97 ft) diameter cylinder would be just under 8 m
(26.5 ft) long, so the team ―rounded up‖ to an 8 m
length, resulting in a module with a total pressurized
volume of approximately 274.9 m
3
(9,708.5 ft3
).
IX. MODULE ORIENTATION
As shown in Figure 7, the problem with a horizontal
cylinder is the loss of ceiling height toward the sides of
the module. To avoid this inefficient design, different
internal orientations for equipment near the edges could
be implemented, but that violates best practices
guidelines for consistent equipment orientation.
―Floors‖ could be positioned to provide sufficient headheight at the edges, but that would result in a very high
ceiling height at the center of the module, potentially
impeding crew mobility in microgravity. On the other
hand, a vertical orientation could provide consistent
ceiling heights across each level. Although wall
curvature would drive conformal design for equipment
placed near the walls, the curvature is relatively small,
compared to a 4.5 m (14.76 ft) diameter ISS module.
For these reasons, the team selected a vertical cylinder.
Fig. 7: Horizontal versus Vertical Orientation.
Based on the proposed vessel length of 8 m (26.2 ft)
and a 99th percentile crew stature of 1.92 m (6 ft 4 in),
the DSH was organized into four decks, each with a
volume as shown in Figure 8.
X. DSH CONCEPTUAL LAYOUT
Once functional area volumes were defined, and
activity frequency and duration were established, the
team developed candidate layouts that could
accommodate all activities in the most efficient manner,
while providing safe, comfortable living and working
spaces. 
GLEX-2012.05.3.8x12222 Page 7 of 10
Fig. 8: Four-level DSH Concept.
Based on anecdotal evidence from crew collected
during evaluations5
and ISS post-mission debriefs, the
crew typically wants a clear separation of ―work‖ and
―leisure‖ areas. Therefore, the team tried to group
maintenance, geological science, and EVA operations
(suits and airlock) into a single area. Crews have also
expressed a desire to separate ―noisy and dirty‖ from
―quiet and clean‖ areas. Exercise and waste containment
system (WCS) activities fell into the former category,
while galley and sleeping areas were placed in the latter.
The multi-level DSH concept allowed these groupings
to be separated by distance for safety and hygiene. This
resulted in the four decks being categorized as: 1) group
living and operations; 2) personal living; 3) work and
hygiene; and 4) stowage and subsystems (Figure 9). A
central translation tunnel provides access between
decks.
Fig. 9: Conceptual DSH Layout.
Three areas required careful consideration during
placement: the waste containment system (WCS),
exercise, and medical areas. Due to the private nature of
WCS activities, it was advantageous to have this area
separate from group leisure and crew quarters. Exercise
tends to be dirty and loud, so it was desirable to locate
exercise equipment away from food and crew quarters.
The medical area, which normally would be considered
clean, should be located near exercise for metabolic
monitoring. Therefore, these three areas were co-located
with one another and grouped with the ―dirty‖ and
―work‖ activities, isolated from the galley, but close
enough to crew quarters as to make the WCS readily
accessible. It was assumed that the maintenance and
medical areas would have a lower frequency of use than
WCS or exercise equipment, but privacy curtains could
be used between areas to prevent contamination.
Some sub-system equipment would necessarily be
distributed throughout the vessel, for example carbon
dioxide removal units could be located on each level to
reduce the number of fans, which tend to be noisier
pieces of equipment. As noted in earlier work done to
estimate the ECLS functions for a Lunar Outpost5
, each
deck would need to accommodate volume for air
revitalization, fire detection and suppression, and
emergency response functions.
X.I Deck 1: Control Room and Group Living
The upper-most deck, or Deck 1 (Figure 10), is
where the Orion would dock. This deck contains the
subsystem and spacecraft control consoles, the galley,
and a dining area that doubles as a conference room or
group recreation area.
This deck would share sub-systems operations with
group living. It is assumed during the journey that most
day-to-day activities will be taking place in this area.
This deck would provide the space for crew recreational
activities (e.g., games, watching movies), eating/group
meals, and personal or group work space (e.g., group
meetings). All sub-systems will be monitored and
controlled from this area.
Fig. 10: Deck 1- Group Living and Operations.
As previously mentioned, the team proposed
distributed stowage. Stowing some food, water, and
hygiene supplies on Deck 1 not only provides modest 
GLEX-2012.05.3.8x12222 Page 8 of 10
crew radiation shielding, but also streamlines operations
by limiting the need to continually retrieve items from a
central storage area. Because Orion is the designated
safe haven, having a supply of food and water near
Orion could also aid in emergency response.
X.II Deck 2: Crew Quarters and Stowage
Deck 2 (Figure 11) was primarily dedicated to four
individual crew quarters, arranged around a central
translation pathway. The crew quarters were positioned
as far towards the center of the module as possible, in
order to maximize radiation protection by way of
stowage (e.g., clothing or water) and other nonhazardous items between the crew and the pressure
shell. The team avoided mounting moving equipment
on the floor above, or the ceiling below, to minimize
noise in the crew cabins. Using the same distributed
stowage logic as outlined above, the team assumed that
crew clothing and some hygiene supplies would be
located in the crew quarters on Deck 2 to streamline
operations and provide modest radiation protection
benefit.
Fig. 11: Deck 2 – Crew Quarters.
The living quarters are approximately two times
larger than those currently on ISS, but it is expected that
the larger space would be desirable for long-duration
missions and distributed stowage. For example, the
crew quarters will support personal activities (e.g.,
report writing) and communication, some hygiene
activities (e.g., wet towel bath, brushing teeth),
changing clothes, long-term medical care, and possibly
a safe-haven during a radiation event.
In a 2006 report4
, the activities that were performed
in the ISS crew quarters (besides that of sleep) included:
using personal computer (i.e., emails), changing clothes,
reading (i.e., review of procedures or books), listening
to music/watching a movie, hygiene, family and ground
conferences, and non-sleep resting periods.
X.III. Deck 3: Maintenance, Hygiene, Medical, and
Exercise Area
Deck 3 (Figure 12) is where most hands-on activities
would occur. This area houses space for science,
maintenance, hygiene, exercise, and medical operations.
To minimize translation (and potential contamination)
external maintenance items come into the DSH through
the Airlock, and go straight to the maintenance area.
The waste/hygiene areas are readily accessible from the
crew quarters, but relatively isolated from the galley.
The exercise equipment is also on Deck 3.
The bulk of medical and biological operations would
center on crew health and routine medical care.
Therefore, it was desirable to have the medical station
located close the exercise area to collect metabolic data.
The medical station will also be used to collect crew
health data (e.g., blood draws, BP and heart rate,
intracranial pressure data, etc.). Thus, having the
biological station close to the medical station was
desirable. Most medical care will consist of minor
emergencies (e.g., cuts/scraps) with more critical
medical needs having a low probability of occurrence.
Although the medical station should be able to
accommodate minor surgeries, it was assumed that
long-term care and recovery would occur in the
crewmembers’ personal quarters.
Fig. 12: Deck 3- Maintenance, Hygiene, Medical, and
Exercise Area
X.IV Deck 4: Subsystem Equipment and Stowage
Due to the low ceiling height, Deck 4 is limited to
stowage and some subsystem equipment. Noisy or
dangerous equipment is mounted on Deck 4 as this is as
far away as possible from the crew quarters and Orion.
For example, the treadmill’s vibration isolation and 
GLEX-2012.05.3.8x12222 Page 9 of 10
stabilization system is a relatively noisy piece of
equipment, so it was designed to mount through the
Deck 4 ceiling, as far as possible from the crew’s
personal quarters and work areas. Other sub-system
equipment located on Deck 4 would include the water
reclamation system and some high pressure oxygen
ECLS equipment.
XI. VOLUME COMPARISON
XI.I Pressurized Volume
As a sanity check on the DSH estimated volume, the
team compared the DSH to Mir, Skylab, ISS, TransHab,
and Bigelow Aerospace’s BA330. As shown in Table 1
(refer to the last page of this paper), the DSH has the
lowest pressurized volume of the six spacecraft. When
divided by the crew complement, the DSH pressurized
volume per crew member falls within the range of other
historical spacecraft.
XI.II Habitable Volume
Habitable volume, defined as free volume,
unencumbered by equipment or stowage, is difficult to
assess at this level of design detail. From the initial
estimates outlined above, DSH is predicted to contain
approximately 118 m3
(4,167 ft3
) of equipment.
Subtracting this and 24.42 m3
(862 ft3
) (the 10% margin
for internal structural features and packing inefficiency
noted in section VIII) from the total pressurized volume
of 274.9 m
3
(9,708.5 ft3
), yields 132.48 m3
(4,678.5 ft3
)
habitable volume. Divided by four crew members, this
leaves about 33.12 m
3
(1169.6 ft3
) habitable volume per
crewmember, not including Orion or MMSEV volume.
Although NASA-STD-30006
has recently been retired,
historical recommendations from that document (Figure
13) serve to illustrate how the DSH compares in terms
of habitable volume. Using the long-duration habitable
volume guideline of approximately 19 m3
(671 ft3
), and
assuming actual DSH equipment volume does not
exceed preliminary estimates, the DSH architecture
exceeds the optimal habitable volume for a crew of 4,
particularly when enhanced with MMSEV and Orion
habitable volumes.
Fig. 13. NASA-STD-3000 habitable volume guideline
XII. CONCLUSIONS
XII.I Methodology
For the purposes of establishing a preliminary
volume and vehicle layout from which subsystem teams
could begin working detailed designs, the methodology
outlined in this paper was successful. Although the
exercise was suspended prior to completing detailed
designs, the preliminary concept discussed here allowed
each of the subsystem teams to formulate a design
strategy, and begin developing integrated assessments.
XII.II DSH Volume
Based on an assessment of total pressurized volume,
an argument could be made that the proposed DSH
concept may be under-sized in comparison with some
historical spacecraft, particularly since DSH must be
self-sufficient for more than a year, with no emergency
resupply or rescue options. Of course, technology
advancements and equipment miniaturization could
make some of these historical comparisons inaccurate.
On the other hand, preliminary assessment of
habitable volume suggests that the proposed DSH
concept could be over-sized with respect to historical
guidelines, though this may also be misleading because
equipment volume is not well defined at this level of
design fidelity. It should also be noted that the
historical guidelines did not envision missions
exceeding 12 months.
What can be said is that the conceptual DSH volume
calculated using this method appears to be reasonable
with respect to historical spacecraft experience, though
obviously much more detailed design would be required
for proper validation.
XII.III Applicability to Other Spacecraft
Although the design presented in this paper is
specific to a particular mission, destination, and crew
size, the logic used to size this spacecraft may be useful
in establishing conceptual designs to initiate other longduration, microgravity spacecraft design exercises.
REFERENCES
1Christensen, Eric L, (2003). Meteoroid/Debris
Shielding. TP−2003-210788.
2NASA-STD-3001, Volume 2: Human Factors,
Habitability, and Environmental Health. National
Aeronautics and Space Administration.
3NASA/SP-2010-3407, Human Integration Design
Handbook (HIDH). National Aeronautics and Space
Administration. 
GLEX-2012.05.3.8x12222 Page 10 of 10
4Rando, C., and Duvall, L. (2006). Summary of
Evaluation Results for the 2006 International Space
Station (ISS) PDR Low-Fidelity Crew Quarters Mockup, CQ-06-064.
5Carrasquillo, R., Bagdigian, R., Anderson, M., and
Lewis, J. (2008). Support Requirements and Technology
Challenges for NASA’s Constellation Program. ICES
Paper 2008-01-2018.
6NASA-STD-3000, Revision B, Space Flight HumanSystem Standard, Volume 1, Section 8, NASA, July
1995.
Parameter DSH *
Mir
t
Skylab
:t
TransHab
§
BA 330
<J[
6-Crew
ISS
Crew 4 2 – 6 (3 typ.) 3 6 6 6
Mission
Duration 380 Days Up to 437 Days Up to 84 Days 180 Days 180 Days Per
Expedition
180 Days Per
Expedition
Length 8 m
(26.25 ft)
14.4 m (Spektr
Module)
(47.2 ft)
14.66 m
(Workshop
Module)
(48.1 ft)
11 m (36 ft) 14 m (45 ft)
8.5 m (Destiny
Module)
(27.9 ft)
Diameter 7.0 m
(22.97 ft)
4.15 m max.
(13.6 ft)
6.7 m
(Workshop
Module)
(22 ft)
8.2 m
(27 ft) 6.7 m (22 ft) Typ. 4.2 m
(13.8 ft)
Total
Pressurized
Volume
274.9 m
3
(9,708 ft
3
)
380.1 m
3
(13 419 ft
3
)
>345 m
3
(12,184ft
3
)
339.8 m
3
(12,000 ft
3
)
330 m
3
(11,653.8 ft
3
)
Total 916 m
3
(32,348 ft
3
)
Pressurized
Volume per
Crewmember
68.73 m
3
(2,427 ft
3
)
126.7 m
3
w/3
crew
(4,474 ft
3
)
>115 m
3
(4,061 ft
3
)
56.63 m
3
(2,000 ft
3
)
55 m
3
(1,942 ft
3
)
152.7 m
3
(6crew)
(5,393ft
3
)
Habitable
Volume per
Crewmember
33.12 m
3
(1,170 ft
3
)
--
115 m
3
(4,061 ft
3
)
-- --
64.67 m
3
(2,284 ft
3
)
Table 1: Comparison of DSH pressurized volume against historical spacecraft