Abstract
The recent ITER re-baseline with the adoption of a full-W wall calls for mandatory boronization studies. ITER pulses will be inboard limited on the W tiles of the central column for several seconds during the current ramp up phase. Our first question of this study is: will it be possible to efficiently start plasma operations in a full-W ITER without any boronization? In particular, throughout the start of research operations (SRO), ITER will be equipped with an asymmetric boronization system as glow anodes in the equatorial plane will not be uniformly distributed in the toroidal direction due to the limited availability of ports. According to recent simulations, such arrangement of the glow anodes could lead to a strongly non-uniform B layer with depleted regions. Our second question hence is: should a boronization be needed to start plasma operations in ITER, would a non-uniform B layer be enough? In November 2024, we attempted to restart WEST plasma operations without boronization after a vent and after installing new bulk W limiter tiles. In about 4 days of operation corresponding to 74 pulse attempts, we reached a maximum pulse duration of 1.55 s and a maximum plasma current of 600 kA. Plasmas were cold and dense, mostly detached from the inboard limiter and dominated by light impurities with radiated power fractions close to unity. No runaway electron beams were observed but the restart without boronization was not timely. We then carried out the first WEST boronization utilizing only 3 out of 6 diborane (B2D6) inlets (half torus), to deposit a non-uniform B layer. Repeatable, 10 s long, ohmic limiter pulses were immediately achieved with radiated power fractions between 50 % and 70 %. Through a separate experiment in February 2025, we achieved matching pulses before and after a second non-uniform boronization to better characterize its effects: the radiated fraction initially dropped by 22 % with the reduction mainly occurring in the central plasma and well correlating with lower UV signals for O, N and W. These effects almost vanished by the end of the first day after the non-uniform boronization corresponding to a cumulated injected energy of 0.7 GJ.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
1. Boronization needs after the adoption of a full-W wall in ITER
Glow discharge boronization (GDB), simply referred to as boronization in this work, was developed in the 80 s by the TEXTOR team [1] and is an established technique to improve vacuum and wall conditions. Currently operating tokamaks with W plasma facing components (PFC) like ASDEX-Upgrade [2], EAST [3], and WEST [4], are routinely boronized with three main benefits: 1) the partial pressure of O is reduced via ‘gettering’ by a B-rich, nanometric coating layer obtained via the cracking and deposition of diborane (B2H6 or B2D6) within a He glow discharge; 2) the amorphous B layer increases wall pumping, reducing the recycling of both main ion and light impurities, improving density control and enabling advanced tokamak scenarios [5]; 3) the erosion of W from PFC is transiently mitigated as B is eroded in lieu of W. According to the new baseline presented in 2024 [6], ITER will now feature W PFC also in the main chamber and not only in the divertor. The absence of the previously envisaged main chamber Be tiles and their ability to ‘getter’ O might need to be compensated for by implementing a boronization system. However, different constraints and challenges are to be expected when boronizing ITER with respect to current generation devices: the bigger vacuum chamber will require higher B mass to obtain the desired B layer thickness (tens/hundreds of nm); longer plasma pulses and higher fluence will more quickly remobilize the B layer; the limited availability of ports will constrain the total number of glow anodes and their position in the vessel. During the start of research operations (SRO), despite an increase in total number of glow anodes with respect to the 2016 baseline (figure 1 in [7]), these will not be symmetrically arranged in the toroidal direction, neither in the upper nor in the equatorial ports. Recent numerical efforts carried out by the ITER Organization [7] with an established model of the glow discharge [8,9] suggest that such an arrangement of glow anodes might lead to a strongly non-uniform B layer deposition. In fact, in the portion of the vessel that is furthest from any glow anode, the B2D6 reaction probability, which is a precursor for the coating of nearby surfaces, is predicted to be two orders of magnitude lower than in the vicinity of glow anodes (figure 8 in [7]). Dedicated experiments in existing full-W machines are, therefore, necessary to demonstrate whether plasma operations after a vent can be safely and readily restarted without any boronization and, should a B layer be needed, whether a spatially non-uniform one is enough. In fall 2024, both ASDEX-Upgrade and WEST first attempted a restart after a vent without boronization and then went on to perform a non-uniform boronization to mimic what might occur in ITER. The non-uniform boronization in ASDEX-Upgrade was obtained by energizing a subset of the 4 available glow electrodes while feeding B2D6 from all usual locations [10]. For the non-uniform boronization in WEST, as detailed below, we utilized a complementary approach: we energized 6/6 glow anodes but we fed B2D6 from 3/6 locations, hence one half of the torus only. This contribution solely concerns GDB: boronization via an impurity powder dropper (IPD), which is also extensively being studied in WEST in collaboration with PPPL, is beyond the scope of this paper and is covered in separate publications [[11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16]].
2. WEST capabilities for versatile boronization studies
The W Environment Steady-state Tokamak (WEST) is a midsize, megaampere class, superconducting device [17,18] with active cooling of lower and upper divertor as well as inboard and outboard limiters. All PFC are either made of bulk W or protected with a W coating (Fig. 1a). Since 2022, with the beginning of the phase II of operations, the entire lower divertor of WEST is equipped with ITER grade, W monoblocks [19]. WEST is exclusively heated via radiofrequency systems: LHCD, ICRH and since 2025 also ECRH. In February 2025, WEST achieved a record plasma duration of 1337 s. As far as boronization capabilities are concerned, WEST is equipped with 6, toroidally equidistant glow anodes. As shown by the top view of the vessel in Fig. 1b, these anodes are energized by two independent power supplies that allow to separately utilize anodes 1–3–5 (red circles) or anodes 2–4–6 (green circles). Glow anodes are located on the outer wall protection panels at the vessel top, as indicated by the colored circle in Fig. 1c. WEST also features 6 B2D6 feeds locations, toroidally aligned with the anodes. The feeding system allows to inject from either side of the torus, namely from sectors 1–2–3 or sectors 4–5–6 indicated by pink and yellow squares respectively in Fig. 1b. The poloidal location of B2D6 inlets, which are found behind the baffle at the bottom of the outer wall protection panels, is indicated by the colored squares in Fig. 1c. More details on the design of glow anodes and B2D6 feeds in WEST can be found in [4], Fig. 3. The standard WEST boronization parameters are: gas composition ∼90 % He/∼10 % B2D6, pressure 0.5 Pa, procedure duration ∼5 h, injected B mass ∼10 g, 6/6 glow anodes, 6/6 B2D6 inlets. During any boronization in WEST, we utilize only the midplane pumping duct, indicated by a black arrow in Fig. 1b. Since 2025, we can also insert from the top of the vessel two new boronization-dedicated collector probes to deposit B layers on as many as 42 samples exposed at two different toroidal locations indicated by the white stars in Fig. 1b.

Download: Download high-res image (357KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. A) inside view of the west vacuum vessel with w plasma facing components (baffle, lower divertor, upper divertor, inboard limiters, outboard limiters) indicated by a red W. b) Top view of the WEST vacuum vessel with details of the boronization system: red/green circles for the two independently power supplied sets of glow anodes, pink/yellow squares for the two independently fed sets of B2D6 gas inlets, white stars for the two collector probes, black arrow for the midplane pumping duct. c) Inside view of the WEST vacuum vessel with a glow anode in the red/green circle and a B2D6 gas inlet in the pink/yellow square. d) Magnetic equilibrium for WEST limited plasma pulse #60496. e) Magnetic equilibrium for WEST diverted phase of pulses #61167. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

3. Experiment 1, part 1: Plasma restart without boronization
ITER is expected to initiate plasma pulses on the inboard, now W, central column tiles and to perform a current ramp up of several seconds in such configuration [6]. The first question is whether this kind of pulses could be achieved during the very first attempt of operating ITER, but also after each vent for long term maintenance, without performing any prior boronization. In November 2024, after the summer vent, we carried out a dedicated experiment in WEST by leveraging the installation of brand new, bulk W, inboard limiter tiles. First, we performed the standard conditioning sequence with ∼5 days of bake at ∼190 °C, followed by a total 40 h of D2 glow discharge but without the usual subsequent boronization. We then intended to run circular, inboard limited, 10 s long, ohmic pulses by extending the duration of the limiter phase that is routinely programmed at the beginning of any WEST pulse, without ever moving to a diverted configuration. The magnetic equilibrium for the flat top of one of these limited pulses (60496) is presented in Fig. 1d. A total of 74 attempts over about 4 days of operation were devoted to this experiment but only 3 pulses (60496, 60514, 60523) lasted longer than 1 s and none of the pulses reached the intended 10 s. We did not observe runaway electron beams. We indicate the duration of all pulses from this dataset in Fig. 2 with the blue triangles to the left of the blue vertical dashed line. Overall, without any boronization after the vent, we achieved a maximum plasma duration of 1.55 s and a maximum plasma current of 600 kA.

Download: Download high-res image (61KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Duration of inboard limited, ohmic plasma pulses during the plasma restart experiment of November 2024 with bulk W tiles (blue triangles) and November 2020 with BN limiter tiles (red squares). The vertical dashed lines indicate boronization. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

In Fig. 3 we present time traces for midplane integrated electron density nl, plasma current IP, central electron temperature Te0 and total radiated power Prad for these three pulses in blue, green and red respectively. In Fig. 3a we observe that, according to interfero-polarimetry [20], all three pulses have a similar strong and uncontrolled nl with a maximum around 3.5x1019 m−2 before disruption. These high densities are ruled by the strong outgassing from the new bulk W limiters as we did not feed any D2 other than the prefill in these pulses. Fig. 3b shows that the three pulses had three different flat top IP: 400 kA, 500 kA and 600 kA. A higher IP ramp up rate and flat top value did not improve the plasma duration. Fig. 3c presents ECE [21] measurements of Te0: all pulses were in the 1–2 keV range. Interestingly Te0 does not depend on the programmed IP value, but it is rather affected by the unstable wall conditions that are strongly dependent on the outcome of the previous, disruptive pulses and the strong subsequent outgassing: baratron gauges measure a peak pressure of 31 mPa, 42 mPa and 50 mPa after pulses 60496, 60,514 and 60,523 respectively. The H-to-D isotopic ratio for pulse 60496, measured with a quadrupole mass spectrometer mounted on the lower divertor pumping duct, drops from 85-90 % before the pulse to as low as 5–6 % during the pulse and then rises back to 60 % in 30 s after the pulse. For pulses 60,514 and 60,523 the trend is similar but the isotopic ratio gets slightly higher pulse by pulse. These data indicate that, despite bake and D2 glow discharge, the new bulk W, unboronized limiter tiles represent a large reservoir of H2. We also observe a strong increase of mass 28, attributed to either N2 or CO. Bolometry [22] measurements of Prad, shown in Fig. 3d, exhibit flat top values comparable with the ohmic heating power (not shown), leading to a total radiated power fraction Frad close to unity. Prad data were not acquired for 60523. The strong rise of Prad before disruption, well correlated with an increasing nl and a decreasing Te0 is compatible with a radiative collapse [23]. In summary, even the better pulses were all cold, dense, detached and with strong outgassing from the new bulk W limiter tiles.

Download: Download high-res image (157KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Time traces of a) midplane integrated electron density, b) plasma current, c) central electron temperature and d) total radiated power for ohmic, inboard limited pulses 60496, 60,514 and 60523.

The visible spectroscopy system in WEST [24,25] allows us to study the behavior of weakly ionized impurities in the vicinity of the contact point between these inboard limited pulses and the bulk W limiter tiles which is found near the equatorial plane. In Fig. 4 we present visible spectra acquired at Z = −4 cm and t = 1 s during the same three pulses (60496 in blue, 60,514 in green, 60,523 in red). The overall difference in brightness of the three spectra correlates nicely with Te0 (Fig. 3b) but they exhibit the same set of lines and their relative amplitude is very comparable. Within these spectra we identified several lines: DI at 4101 Å and 4341 Å, expected as D is injected during the prefill; CII at 3921 Å and 4267 Å, related to both air (CO2) contamination and human work inside the vessel, other than some exposed C from delaminated W-coated CFC components like antenna protections; OII at 4185 Å and 4415 Å, due to both air (CO2, O2, H2O) contamination and WXOY layers onto W tiles; NII at 3995 Å and 4242 Å, also due to air (N2) contamination; BII at 4195 Å, due to prior boronizations; WI at 4009 Å due to W sputtering. The last two peaks are indicated by arrows as their amplitude is remarkably small. We expected a very weak B signal as these pulses are run on W tiles that were never boronized. The barely detectable WI line, though, is a peculiar feature of these very cold pulses: despite the high light impurity content suggested by OII, CII, NII line radiation, preliminary results from newly installed, embedded Langmuir probes at the inboard limiter indicate Te < 10 eV, consistent with both a detached contact point and negligible W sputtering. These species are compatible with contamination by air molecules introduced in the vessel during the vent (H2O, N2, O2, CO2) and, therefore, not only present in the residual vacuum but also trapped in the PFC. In the absence of boronization, the partial pressure of these impurities (O in particular but not only) is not reduced by the ‘gettering effect’ and the outgassing from the PFC as soon as heated by the plasma is not mitigated by a capping B layer. These hypotheses are supported by strong currents for the corresponding m/Z signals by the midplane mass spectrometer. In conclusion, the restart of WEST plasma operations after a vent could not be achieved in a timely and efficient manner without boronization in a full-W environment. The obtained plasma durations, although way lower than the intended ones, were still higher than those of a similar experiment carried out in 2020: back then we had just installed BN inboard limiter tiles and we also tried to restart WEST after a vent without any prior boronization. As indicated by the red squares in Fig. 2 to the left of the dashed red line, we performed about twice as many attempts without success, despite the low Z material. With these BN tiles, other than air contamination from the vent, we also had very strong outgassing of hydrogenic species indicating that the standard WEST bake was not sufficient back then. Also, in that occasion we had to carry out a boronization (in this case a standard one) in order to be able to restart plasma operations and then pulses were immediately successful (red squares in Fig. 2 to the right of the dashed red line).

Download: Download high-res image (283KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Visible spectrum at inboard W limiter near the equatorial plane for pulses 60,496 (blue), 60,514 (green), 60,523 (red) at t = 1 s. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

4. Experiment 1, part 2: Plasma restart after non-uniform boronization
Since the restart of plasma operations without any B layer was not timely, we proceeded to boronize. As described in section 1, our second main question in view of ITER is the following: should boronization be necessary to (re)start plasma operation in a full-W machine, would a spatially non-uniform B layer be sufficient? Given the abovementioned versatility of the WEST boronization system, we had to choose between several possible combinations of glow anodes and B2D6 feed locations when deciding which setup could produce the most non-uniform B layer possible and to maximize our chances to characterize its effect on plasma pulses. In Fig. 5 we present a simulation obtained with the same model of the glow discharge [8,9] mentioned in section 1, although adapted to the WEST geometry and boronization setup. After a scoping study, we concluded that the arrangement that should yield the strongest non-uniformity in B deposition in WEST could be obtained by energizing 6/6 glow anodes (red and green circles in Fig. 5) while feeding B2D6 only from half of the torus (sectors 1–2–3, pink squares in Fig. 5). The simulation predicts that, with such a setup, the B2D6 reaction probability, a precursor for the coating of nearby surfaces, in sectors 4–5–6 is reduced by more than 2 orders of magnitude (area within the grey solid line in Fig. 5), suggesting that the B layer in this portion of the vessel could be thinner or even inexistent.

Download: Download high-res image (135KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Simulation of the normalized B2D6 reaction probability, a precursor for the coating of nearby surfaces, for a WEST boronization with 6/6 active glow anodes (red and green circles) and 3/6 B2D6 feed locations (pink squares). A grey solid line indicates the B-depleted region and the two white stars indicate the position of the dedicated reciprocating collector probes. The color bar is in logarithmic scale. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

In November 2024, we carried out such non-uniform boronization for the first ever time in WEST. The only difference with respect to a standard WEST boronisation was the absence of B2D6 feeding from sectors 4–5–6. Other than that, the duration of the procedure and the total injected B mass were the usual ones (∼5 h, 10 g of B). At the time of writing, very recent post mortem results [26] confirm that the B-rich layer deposited with a non-uniform boronization in WEST is, indeed, non-uniform and has a 40 % lower B areal density in the torus portion away from the B2D6 inlets where one of the two dedicated collector probes (white stars in Fig. 5) is located. The difference between experiment and modeling could be attributed to the sticking coefficient of B assumed to be 1 in the simulations.
In the interest of time, we carried out this very first non-uniform boronisation with the vessel at the operation temperature (70 °C) and not at bake temperature. This is not uncommon practice when boronizing WEST during an experimental campaign. We should disclaim that in the previous 4 campaigns we always boronized before any plasma operation, while still being at bake temperature (120–190 °C). This difference in temperature makes for a less direct comparison of this particular boronization with the previous, standard ones [4]. However, there seems to be no consensus in the wall conditioning community about the fact that boronizing at bake temperature necessarily leads to enhanced O ‘gettering’ in the B film. A hotter vessel could increase the deposition rate [4] leading to a thicker but also more compact and, therefore, less chemically active B layer [27].
The plasma restart after such non-uniform boronization was immediately successful. Besides one pulse attempt needed to adapt the prefill to the new wall conditions, we were able to readily execute 10 s long, inboard limited, ohmic pulses as programmed. We represent these pulses in Fig. 2 with blue triangles to the right of the dashed vertical blue line indicating the non-uniform boronization. This result indicates that a non-uniform B layer is sufficient to restart plasma operation in WEST with full-W PFC after an extended vent. In the very first two pulses after boronization (60525, 60526) with IP = 300 kA, we did not inject any D2 other than the prefill. The natural density was around 0.4x1019 m−2, which is ∼10 times lower than the one obtained before boronization. This effect is due to a transient strong increase in short term D2 retention in the new and not yet saturated B layer. The effect of boronization on the D2 balance will be treated in a separate future publication. Frad was between 50 % and 60 %, instead of close to unity as without any B layer, and the O lines in the UV spectrum were much dimmer. Because of these very peculiar and transient conditions, these two pulses were strongly attached to the limiter, with Te0 = 3–4 keV which can lead to significant W sputtering, as confirmed by the clearly visible W peaks in the UV and visible spectrum, not present before boronization. We then reactivated the central density feedback to run three pulses (60527, 60528, 60529) at nl ∼1.5x1019 m−2 where the density request was matched better and better with less and less D2 fueling, indicating the progressive saturation of the B layer. We observed a pulse by pulse decrease of Te0 from 1.5 keV to 0.5 keV, an increase of Frad 40 % to 60 %, an increase of the WI 4009 Å visible line, and a decrease of the BII 4195 Å visible line. The extra radiation measured in 60,529 with respect to 60,527 is mainly captured by the central bolometry channels [22]: a much more peaked radiation profile suggests a stronger W contamination, as corroborated here by the lower Te0. For context, as shown by the red squares in Fig. 2 to the right of the red dashed vertical line, we report that during the plasma restart attempt with new BN limiter tiles we drew the same conclusion: only after a boronization (a standard WEST one, in that case) it was possible to execute plasma pulses as intended. Similar conclusions on the need for a B layer came from ASDEX-Upgrade where plasma pulses attempted without any prior boronization could not be sustained for more than few tens of ms and were prone to runaway electron beams. Instead, after a non-uniform boronization obtained with a subset of the usual 4 glow anodes, plasma operations could readily be restarted [10].
5. Experiment 2: Characterization of non-uniform boronization
Through experiment 1, described in 3 Experiment 1, part 1: Plasma restart without boronization, 4 Experiment 1, part 2: Plasma restart after non-uniform boronization, we demonstrated that boronization is needed to (re)start a full-W device in a safe and timely manner after a vent and that a toroidally non-uniform B layer is sufficient. However, pulses enabled by boronization at the very beginning of a new campaign, like the ones studied in experiment 1, are not suitable for a thorough characterization of the effects of the B layer on parameters like the total radiated fraction or the signals from light and heavy impurities. This is because: a) these pulses cannot be compared with any equivalent pulse without a B layer, as all pulses were unsuccessful prior to the boronization; b) all pulse executed at the very beginning of a new campaign are peculiar in the sense that wall conditions are rapidly evolving and several days of plasma operation might be required before plasma pulses can complete the wall conditioning themselves.
Therefore, we needed controlled and comparable pulses, far from the beginning of the campaign, in order to quantitatively characterize the effects of such a non-uniform B layer on total radiation and impurity behavior. To this end, in February 2025, we carried out a separate, complementary experiment. The strategy of experiment 2 consisted in running a series of identically programmed pulses before and after another non-uniform boronization. The strategy of experiment 2 was the following: i) we devoted a full session to establish pre-B reference wall conditions (far enough from any previous boronization) and to demonstrate they were stable by repeating as many times as possible the same plasma pulse; ii) we then performed a non-uniform boronization in the same fashion as for experiment 1 (6/6 glow anodes, 3/6 B2D6 inlets); iii) we carried out a second session in which we programmed the same plasma pulses to assess changes in wall conditions due to the non-uniform B layer and to monitor their evolution as we cumulated plasma time and energy. We chose the plasma scenario for experiment 2 to be the closest possible to ‘an average WEST pulse’: L-mode, standard LSN diverted equilibrium (figure 1e), IP = 400 kA, nl ∼ 4x1019 m−2, lower hybrid current drive power PLHCD ∼ 4 MW. These are the plasma parameters during the 15–20 s long flat top phase, while the total plasma duration is of 25–30 s. All pulses have an initial inboard limited phase of ∼1.5 s before switching to the LSN diverted phase.
During the pre-B session, we achieved a total of 10 good pulses, 7 of which in the desired scenario (61155, 61156, 61162, 61163, 61165, 61166, 61167). By ‘good pulse’ we intend here a pulse that has at least 10 s of LHCD power flat top in which the standard deviation of IP, nl and PLHCD or ohmic power Pohm is below 10 %. The other three pulses were two ohmic pulses of ∼10 s each (61147, 61150) and one LHCD power ramp up pulse with PLHCD ∼ 2 MW (61154). We cumulated a total plasma time of ∼281 s and energy of ∼680 MJ. During the post-B session, we achieved a total of 15 good pulses: 7 ohmic pulses (61188, 61190, 61191, 61192, 61193, 61194, 61195), one LHCD power ramp up pulse with PLHCD ∼ 2 MW (61197), and 7 pulses with PLHCD ∼ 4 MW (61198, 61199, 61201, 61202, 61203, 61205, 61212). We cumulated a total plasma time of ∼337 s and energy of ∼740 MJ. In the following we will present time traces of various pulse parameters utilizing this color code: with blue lines we draw data from a good 4 MW pulse representative of pre-B conditions (61167), with red lines data from the first good 4 MW pulse of the post-B session (61198) and with green lines data from the last good 4 MW pulse of the post-B session (61212).
The first result is that we achieved matching pulses in terms of IP (figure 6a), nl (Fig. 6b), and PLHCD (Fig. 6c). The modulations of PLHCD during the early portion of the LHCD phase are due to the real time infrared protection system that modulates the heating power as it detects an overheating of the upper divertor cooling tubes due to upward directed fast electron ripple losses, a well know feature of LHCD-heated, LSN diverted pulses in WEST [28]. According to ECE, Te0 (Fig. 6d) is only marginally affected by the B layer, with an average flat top value of ∼2.5 keV for all three pulses. The most striking effect of boronization is the transient reduction of Frad. The average Frad during the LHCD flat top of pre-B pulses is 45 % ± 1 %, which confirms the stability of wall conditions throughout that session. We measure different values after the non-uniform boronization. For the first post-B pulse, the average Frad during the LHCD flat top drops to 33 %. In Fig. 6e and 6f, we display the main plasma and lower divertor radiated power fraction, hereafter shortened 
 and 
. With reference to Fig. 5 in [22], 
 is the ratio between the radiated power measured by bolometry channels blow the X-point (1 to 3) and the total injected power. Same for 
 with channels above the X-point (4 to 16). We observe that the lower Frad in the first post-B pulse is mostly due to a reduction of 
 (from 31 % to 21 % during the LHCD flat top) while we measure a smaller decrease in 
 (from 14 % to 12 % during the LHCD flat top). This result suggests that the B layer is thicker and/or less quickly remobilized on the main chamber limiters than on the lower divertor targets, leading to lower impurity contamination of the main plasma. Conversely, the magnetic strike lines being a net erosion zone [29], one would expect a smaller reduction of the impurity content in the divertor plasma, as any B layer on the divertor would be very quickly removed, especially in long pulses device with an attached divertor regime [30,31]. For the last post-B pulse, the average Frad during the LHCD flat top rises back to 28 %, indicating that a significant part of the B layer effect in mitigating impurity migration from the main chamber limiters faded by the end of the session. However, the plasma time and energy cumulated throughout the session are insufficient to bring conditions back to the pre-boronization level, at least in terms of Frad.

Download: Download high-res image (474KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Time traces of a) plasma current, b) central line integrated density, c) LHCD power, d) central electron temperature, e) main plasma and f) divertor radiated power fraction before boronization (blue), for first pulse after boronization (red) and for last pulse of the session (green). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

We complement bolometry data with midplane-integrated, UV spectroscopy [32] measurements for the same pulses (Fig. 7). These data are not absolutely calibrated but, since the plasma scenario is fixed, a pulse-to-pulse comparison of the counts/s of a given spectral line can help us guess whether the relative content of the associated species has changed. Data for the B V line (262.3 Å) are in Fig. 7a: the absence of a clear variation between a pre-B 4 MW pulse (blue) with respect to the first post-B 4 MW pulse (red) and the last post-B 4 MW pulse (green) suggests that the B content in the main plasma does not significantly change after boronization. This could mean that the B layer deposited on the various PFC (in particular lower divertor targets and midplane limiters) is so quickly remobilized that any effect on the main plasma B content vanishes already during ohmic pulses and intermediate LHCD power ramp up pulses, hence by the time of the session when the 4 MW scenario is established. In Fig. 7b, we present data form the He II line (256.3 Å): the He signal is nearly a factor of 10 higher after boronization where He acts as the carrier gas (>85 % He, <15 % B2D6) and it is, therefore, deposited within the B layer. In a couple of pulses with LHCD, though, He is exhausted and by the end of the session its signal is completely back to the pre-B level. Data for the O IV line (238.4 Å) are in Fig. 7c: here we observe a factor of ∼3 decrease after boronization, indicating a clear ‘gettering’ effect due to O trapping in the B layer as expected. This mitigation of the O content, although partially reduced, is a long-term effect as it is still very much present at the end of the post-B session. This behavior is not in contradiction with the fact that the B layer might be readily removed from net erosion zones like the limiter contact point or the divertor strike lines: the O ‘gettering’ effect is mainly due to the presence of a B layer in the large main chamber surface that is not wetted by the plasma and hence not prone to ion erosion, leading to reduced sourcing and recycling of O from recessed, unwetted areas. In Fig. 7d, we observe a similar trend for the N V line (247.6 Å), reduced by a factor of ∼2 after boronization and still as low at the end of the post-B session. We believe that N might also be absorbed by the B layer as observed during WEST experiments with a B powder dropper [[11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16]], although the underlying chemical mechanism is less investigated in the literature. Fig. 7e displays data for the Cu XVIII line (234.2 Å), one of the main materials of the LHCD launchers: the Cu signal is almost completely suppressed after boronisation. This is consistent with both the presence of a B layer covering Cu on the face of the launchers and with an overall lower light impurity content, hence less projectiles for sputtering to begin with. This effect is however transient as, by the end of the session, the B layer is mostly eroded from the launchers and the overall impurity content in the plasma has increased, leading to almost as much Cu migration as prior to the boronization. Last but not least, in Fig. 7f we present data for the W XLV line (265.6 Å) which exhibits a strong, factor of ∼6 reduction after boronization. This result indicates a clear, although transient, mitigation of W migration towards the central plasma most probably due to reduced W sputtering at the PFC because of the lower overall impurity content thanks to the abovementioned ‘gettering’ effect. By the end of the post-B session, the W XLV signal increases but it is still not quite back to the pre-B level. These trends correlate well with the main plasma radiated fraction (figure 6e) as radiative losses in the core of the plasma are mainly due to W.

Download: Download high-res image (244KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Time traces of midplane-integrated UV spectroscopy uncalibrated data for a) B V (262.3 Å), b) He II (256.3 Å), c) O IV (238.4 Å), d) N V (247.6 Å), e) Cu XVIII (234.2 Å) and f) W XLV (265.6 Å).

6. Conclusions and future research
This contribution concerns the need for boronization as a potentially necessary wall conditioning technique in order to achieve a timely and safe (re)start of plasma operations after venting a full-W machine. Since the 2024 baseline, W is adopted also for the ITER main chamber wall and not only for the divertor as previously envisaged. This change might require the presence of a B layer to reduce the O partial pressure in the vessel since ITER will no longer be able to rely to the ‘gettering’ effect caused by the oxidation of the Be main chamber wall.
We, therefore, carried out dedicated experiments in WEST which, since November 2024, is back to its full-W environment thanks to the installation of new bulk W limiter tiles. From the lessons learnt in these WEST experiments we draw the following conclusions. 1) It is not possible to achieve a timely restart of plasma operations in a full-W environment without any B layer: although we did not observe runaway electron beams, we did not succeed in running inboard limited pulses longer than 1.55 s onto non-boronized W tiles despite a total of 74 pulse attempts over ∼4 operation days. This was mainly due to radiative collapses caused by the high content of light impurities (but not of W) in very dense, cold, detached, highly radiating plasmas. 2) A non-uniform B layer obtained by carrying out boronization utilizing only 3 out of the 6 B2D6 feed locations (half of the torus) is sufficient to an immediate restart of plasma operations with as intended, 10 s long, inboard limited pulses. While commissioning the device for the rest of the campaign, we did not observe any particular drawback of such a non-uniform boronization compared to a standard one although it has to be noted that in all campaigns between fall 2020 and spring 2024 WEST was equipped with BN midplane limiter tiles. 3) A typical L-mode, lower single null, attached WEST pulse with 4 MW of LHCD heating exhibits a 22 % lower Frad after such a non-uniform boronization when compared to an identically programmed one executed before. Such a reduction of total radiation is mostly occurring in the main plasma and correlates well with a strong reduction of the uncalibrated W XLV signal from midplane-integrated UV spectroscopy. Both benefits are reduced but not entirely vanished by the end of the post-boronization session in which we cumulated ∼337 s of plasma time and ∼740 MJ of energy.
During one of these non-uniform boronizations, we inserted from the top of the vessel two new dedicated collector probes [33] hosting a total of 42 W and stainless-steel samples. These probes are located at two different toroidal angles (white stars in Fig. 1, Fig. 5), one where a regular B layer thickness is expected and one in what, according to simulations, should be the B-depleted region. Post mortem analyses of all samples are currently ongoing and the first next step of this research will be a thorough characterization of B layer thickness as well as composition (O, D, C, N, …) as a function of the sample position. Preliminary results [26] from NRA characterization indicate a 40 % lower B content at the surface of W samples mounted on the collector probe located in the B depleted region (torus half with no B2D6 injection). This is good news for ITER as the B layer obtained via non-uniform boronizations in WEST and AUG is way more uniform that what IO simulations predict. The second step concerns the study of D2 retention with and without a non-uniform B layer: data from pressure gauges and residual gas analyzers are being leveraged to quantify the potential increase in short term retention that might come as a prize for the need of a B layer to enable ITER operations. The third step will consist of repeating the experiment with pre-/post-B matching pulses while performing a standard boronization (6/6 B2D6 feed locations) as opposed to a non-uniform one: this complementary dataset is needed as previous boronization experiments were carried out in a mixed W-BN environment while the ones described here happened in a full-W one. However, the most challenging research ahead of us is the study of evolving wall conditions after a boronization during plasma operation with multiple heating systems, including ICRH and the recently installed ECRH. The role of different WEST heating systems, and of their possible synergistic effects [34], on impurity migration and its consequences on plasma scenarios is a very open research topic that is strongly linked to wall conditioning and boronization. Throughout these steps, we will leverage data from both plasma operations and post mortem analyses to provide input parameters for an established numerical workflow for the modeling of fuel retention based on SOLEDGE-EIRENE and MHIMS simulations [35,36]: the goal of this numerical investigation will be to estimate the effect of a B layer on D and H retention along the ITER grade W divertor of WEST as a function of layer thickness and composition.
Complementary insight on the effect of a non-uniform B layer on plasma operations can be gathered through experiments with an IPD. Several experiments have been carried out at WEST to study the effect of B powder dropping [[11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16]] and more are planned for 2026. While not suitable for replacing GDB prior to a campaign (re)start as it requires the presence of a plasma for B powder to be dropped, the IPD could be utilized to replenish on demand the B layer in the wetted areas where it is quickly sputtered and to extend the interval between two GDB with the benefit of increased runtime.