Abstract
Erosion marker tiles mounted in the lower divertor of WEST were exposed during Phase 1 of plasma operations to evaluate poloidal erosion and re-deposition profiles on the tiles. Previous analyses performed to the exposed tiles have shown distinct erosion- or deposition-dominated patterns on them. Afterwards, core-drilled disks cut from the tiles were sent to different laboratories for further and detailed analysis. The present work relates the main results achieved from five characteristic regions of the tiles after completion of the C3, C4, and C5 experimental campaigns on WEST. SIMS and complementary IBA measurements were carried out and the corresponding elemental depth profiles strongly agree, confirming the main earlier conclusions. Deposits are composed of 2H, B, C, O, Mo and W, mainly. Low amounts of Cr, Fe, Ni and Cu were identified as additional metallic impurities. The research confirmed the locations of thin deposition zones nearby the inner and outer divertor limits: at the inner region, the deposition of B and C is particularly enhanced after C4 and C5. Strong erosion zones are located at the inner and outer strike point (ISP and OSP, respectively) areas: only a small erosion occurred after C3, which evolved after C4; nevertheless, the deposition of B and C is enhanced at the OSP edge after C5 nearby the thin deposition zone. Thick deposits appear in the neighborhood of ISP, towards the high field side, and evolve significantly after C4. The amount of O follows the deposition of B. Low retained amounts of 2H were quantified.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
WESTPhase 1 operationErosion marker tilesElemental analysis
1. Introduction
Tungsten (W) is the selected material to cover the divertor and main wall of ITER due to its particular properties such as a low retention behaviour for hydrogen isotopes, high melting point and low physical sputtering by plasma particles [1,2]. Even so, the first wall components will encounter erosion, particularly induced by the impinging elemental impurities. The eroded particles will migrate and will be re-deposited in distinct areas of the reactor walls. Most of the eroded material will be transported along the scrape off layer (SOL) towards the divertor and locally re-deposited afterwards [[3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11]]. The research of erosion processes occurring along the entire reactor walls [[3], [4], [5], [6]] and, in particular, at the divertor [[7], [8], [9], [10], [11]] are essential to provide a wide database to simulate the material migration along the reactor walls with erosion–deposition codes [1,2], in order to predict the lifetime of plasma facing components during the regular operation of a future reactor. Distinct erosion and re-deposited patterns are expected to be observed in different surface areas of the divertor, i.e., along the strike points (SPs) and adjacent locations, and they will evolve over time under distinct plasma configurations [[7], [8], [9], [10], [11]].
As ITER, the WEST tokamak is a full-W wall reactor device. The main goal of the WEST project is to carry out experiments under ITER-relevant plasma scenarios and test W-based divertor parts [12]. Five experimental campaigns were carried out during its Phase 1 operation, from the end of 2016 towards the early 2021 (C1 to C5 campaigns). A mix of actively cooled ITER-like Plasma Facing Units (PFUs) and inertially cooled W-coated graphite tiles were installed at the lower divertor. Some of the inertially cooled tiles were produced with a thin internal molybdenum (Mo) interlayer, acting as an erosion marker (EM) to better evaluate the local erosion and deposition mechanisms [[2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10]]. As example, ion beam analysis (IBA) is particularly useful to quantify the elemental depth profiles on plasma facing surfaces, in particular when EM markers are used by probing the W content in front of the Mo interlayers.
Almost the whole Phase 1 of WEST operation was conducted with deuterium (2H) plasma discharges. Only a distinct helium (He) campaign was performed at the end of C4 [13,14]. The integrated time for the plasma discharges were close to 2.5 h from C1 to C3, 6 h from C1 to C4 and 7.3 h after the end of C5 [15]. The operation with glow discharges for the injection of boron (B) to reduce plasma impurities was initialized in C3 with 3 discharges, it was extended in C4 with 13 discharges, and in C5 with only 2 discharges.
After the end of the C3, C4 and C5 campaigns, a number of EM tiles were retrieved from the lower divertor for post-mortem analysis. The first elemental and structural characterizations were performed at CEA, France, and at IPP, Germany. Details of the analytical procedure are presented elsewhere [9,10]. The main results have shown the existence of distinct poloidal zones dominated by a net erosion or co-deposition behaviour; the thickness of the deposits increased over time, particularly after the implementation of boronization discharge, and the thicker ones revealed a layered structure of distinct compositions, mainly enriched by W, B and oxygen (O) due to the affinity of B to oxidize [[9], [10], [11], [12]]; finally, the strong ripple in WEST magnetic field imposed changes in the location of the erosion and deposition areas over the toroidal direction [15,16]. Graphite is the structural material of the divertor tiles. Therefore, it was identified a carbon (C) signature in the deposits, as also of re-deposited or not eroded Mo (and W).
Afterwards, core-drilled disks were retrieved from the entire tiles along the poloidal direction, from the High Field Side (HFS) towards the Low Field Side (LFS). The extracted disks were sent to different laboratories for further and local analysis involving a wide range of surface analytical techniques. The present work relates to the analysis of disks extracted from five specific poloidal regions after the above-mentioned C3, C4, and C5 campaigns, corresponding to the main erosion and co-deposition dominated areas, as identified from the first measurements after C3 and C4 [9,10]. The three sets of samples were initially analyzed by Scanning Ion Mass Spectrometry (SIMS) at VTT, Finland [7,17], and afterwards with other complementary IBA techniques at IST, Portugal [8,18].
The aim of the new analyses, this time restricted to different punctual locations in the surface of the selected disks, was to achieve detailed information about the structure and, particularly, of the elemental depth profiles in the samples using complementary techniques. Do they match each other? Are the used techniques sensitive enough? In the present experiments, different IBA techniques were chosen. SIMS has high sensitivity for elemental depth profiling through the entire depth range of the samples. Other complementary IBA techniques have a good sensitivity for a direct elemental quantification, despite a much lower depth resolution. High Z-impurities were previously identified in the deposits by electron microscopy, particularly in the thicker ones [9,11]. Nevertheless, low contents of these impurities are easily quantified by IBA, leading to the identification of their correlations, their sources, and, once again, of the erosion- and deposition-dominated areas. The layered composition of thicker deposits is of particular interest in the investigation. Evidences of the aging effects in B-based samples due to prolonged air exposure are considered in the study.
Section 4.1 presents integral elemental IBA results of the zoned analysis at distinct points of the drilled disks, and a comparison between then and those achieved from the study to the entire tiles. Section 4.2 is dedicated to the comparison of the elemental depth profiles measured by SIMS and by complementary IBA. The new achievements are resumed at the end of the document.
2. Erosion marker tiles and selected core-drilled samples
The lower divertor of WEST is composed of 12 sectors with each sector containing 38 poloidal and/or toroidal modules. During Phase 1 of WEST, one of the sectors was partially filled with the actively-cooled PFUs, while the remaining ones were composed by two groups of inertially cooled W-coated tiles. The tiles located at the inner side (HFS) and at the outer side (LFS) of the divertor have poloidal lengths close to 330 mm and 260 mm, respectively, with widths ranging from 26 mm (HFS limit) up to 33 mm (LFS limit). The W coatings have a nominal thickness of about 12 μm, and a 3 μm thick Mo interlayer on the graphite support structure (standard tiles; ST). Eight of the coated tiles were additionally equipped with EMs: an additional 1–2 μm W top layer and a thin ∼100 nm Mo interlayer was deposited on the pre-existent thicker W coating of ST tiles. The thickness of the pre-deposited W marker layer varied along tiles [10]. Six of the EMs were installed at toroidal positions at both ISP and OSP areas where the toroidal magnetic ripples reach their maxima, leading to large heat and particle fluxes [9,10,16]. Two additional EMs were positioned at similar toroidal positions, but at complementary poloidal coordinates coincident to minimum fluxes for ISP and OSP [16]. Fig. 1a shows the locations of the eight EM tiles and of the maximum and minimum ISP and OSP areas in the lower divertor of WEST. Fig. 1b presents the main elemental depth composition of the as-produced standard ST and erosion EM tiles. Fig. 1c presents the complete geometry of an inner and outer lower divertor tile in WEST along the poloidal coordinate (S-coordinate) from the HFS limit towards the private flux region (PFR), and from PFR to the LFS limit. The eight EMs were assembled to the divertor before the C1 campaign. Two of them were retrieved from the divertor after the C3 campaign (C3-34i, C3-22o), four of them after the C4 campaign (including C4-32i and C4-20o) and the last ones after C5 (C3-33i, C5-21o) [10].

Download: Download high-res image (467KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Adapted from [9,10]. Photo of the section with the locations of the EM tiles at the lower divertor of WEST, retrieved after the C3, C4 and C5 campaigns, and of the maximum ISP and OSP strike points marked (a); schematic diagrams representing the depth composition of the as-produced ST and EM tiles (b); scheme of complete (inner and outer) tile at the lower divertor of WEST (c); erosion–deposition behaviour along the S-coordinate after the C3 campaign (d).

The irradiated tiles were initially analysed by confocal microscopy and X-ray Fluorescence (XRF) at CEA [9]. At IPP the measurements involved scanning electron microscopy assisted by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy and focused ion beam cross-sectioning (SEM-EDS-FIB), Rutherford Backscattering Spectrometry (RBS) and Nuclear Reaction Analysis (NRA) using incident 3He+ ion beams, and Elastic Backscattering Spectrometry (EBS) using incident proton beams (the technique could be described as a proton p-RBS) [10]. All the IBA analysis was performed along the central line of the tiles, at S-coordinate positions almost equally spaced with 12.5 mm along the poloidal direction. Five main erosion and deposition zones were found along the tiles after C3 and C4, as illustrated in Fig. 1d: strong erosion areas at the ISP and OSP, typically within S-coordinates ranges of 220–270 mm and 327–420 mm, and identified herein as zones (3) and (4), respectively; a strong deposition area nearby the ISP within the coordinates 100–220 mm, the zone (2); thin deposition areas at the remaining locations, particularly close to the HFS and LFS of the tiles, zones (1) and (5). Depending on the used plasma configurations, the poloidal range limits of the zones slightly varied over the campaigns, i.e., slight deviations in the S-coordinate limits were predicted. Fig. 1d shows them as they were identified after C3, and few changes were observed after C4 [9,10]. In this work, the samples under analysis were retrieved from these five regions. After the analysis to the entire tiles, core-drilled disks with a diameter of 17 mm and centred along the central line of the tiles from HFS towards LFS were retrieved and sent for analysis to different laboratories. As an example of the drilling procedure, Fig. 2a shows an image of the entire set of core-drilled samples prepared from the tiles irradiated up to the C3 campaign, C3-34i and C3-22o, as also the corresponding S-coordinates for the central points of the core samples. Corresponding drilled disks were retrieved from the tiles exposed up to the C4 and C5 campaigns.

Download: Download high-res image (698KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Centred S-coordinates of the core-drilled disks retrieved from the C3-34i and C3-22o EM tiles; the C3 disks selected for analysis in this work are marked by blue boxes; corresponding drilled disks were retrieved from the C4-32i, C4-20o, C5-33i and C5-21o tiles at similar coordinates and selected for analysis (a). Sample-holder prepared for IBA at IST with the C5 disks; the analysed points were separated toroidally by ∼2 mm from the SIMS craters, while the poloidal distance between all the measurements is ∼3–5 mm (b). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Three sets of five drilled disks representative of the five main erosion–deposition zones, from zone (1) to zone (5) (Fig. 1d), were chosen for detailed and complementary SIMS and IBA analysis. Thin deposits found between ISP and OSP and nearby PFR (see Fig. 1, Fig. 1; within S-coordinates ∼270–327 mm in 1d) were not included in the study. The C3, C4 and C5 sets included the corresponding core-disks:
− C3-34iB, C3-34iK, C3-34iM, C3-22oE, C3-22oJ
− C4-32iB, C4-32iK, C4-32iM, C4-20oE, C4-20oJ
− C5-33iB, C5-33iK, C5-33iM, C5-21oE, C5-21oJ
3. Experimental and analytical procedure
The drilled disks were initially analysed by SIMS at three or four distinct points along the central line of the original tiles, by using a double focusing magnetic sector instrument VG IX-70S and focused 5 keV O2+ incident ion beams with a spot size of 0.3 × 0.4 mm2 [17]. SIMS O profiles will not be shown in the document in order to avoid the influence of the incident O beam. Aiming a good correspondence between the elemental results, the disks were analysed with complementary IBA nearby the points analysed by SIMS: deviated about ∼2 mm from the central line in the toroidal direction. Fig. 2b shows the sample holder used at IST for the experiments with the drilled disks exposed up to the C5 campaign. The points chosen for complementary IBA followed the ones used by SIMS and are marked with red arrows (3–5 mm between successive poloidal coordinates). The gray spots in the samples induced during the SIMS experiments are easily visible in the top and middle disks. The collimator at the entrance of the experimental IBA chamber assured a beam spot of ∼1 mm. The ion beams impinged the disks at normal incidence. A similar procedure was carried out for the analysis of the C3 and C4 drilled disks. Simultaneous EBS and Proton Induced X-ray Emission (PIXE) experiments were performed with 2.3 MeV 1H+ incident beams. A 300 μm absorber foil of mylar was used in front of the Si-Li X-ray detector, positioned at an emission angle of 150° to the beam direction. Simultaneous RBS (for normalization use) and NRA measurements made use of 2.3 MeV 3He+ incident beams. The NRA detector with a depletion thick layer of 2650 μm and active area of 200 mm2 made use of a 75 μm absorber foil of mylar for the measurements and was located at a reaction angle of 135°. For the EBS and RBS measurements, the particle detector was positioned at a scattering angle of 150° [18]. The NRA quantifications resolved the yields of the 2H(3He,p0)4He [19], 10B(3He,p1)12C [20], 11B(3He,p0)13C [21],12C(3He,p0)14N and 12C(3He,p1)14N [22] nuclear reactions. The channel-to-energy calibration of the NRA detection system was assured by the analysis of a pure beryllium plate by resolving the collected 9Be(3He,pi)11B yields [23]. The O, B and C contents were also quantified from the EBS spectra using the measured cross-sections of the elastic scatterings 10B(p,p0)10B and 11B(p,p0)11B [24] and those achieved from the SigmaCalc code for 12C(p,p0)12C and 16O(p,p0)16O [25]. IBA calculations were carried out with the NDF code [26]. PIXE quantifications were performed with GUPIX [27,28]. With the present work, some new results of the IBA analysis performed at IPP to one of the C5 tiles using the SIMNRA code [29] are also presented.
4. Results and discussion
4.1. Particular EBS, NRA and PIXE analysis
As an example of the IBA analysis performed to the C5 drilled disks presented in Fig. 2b, Fig. 3 shows the NRA (3a), EBS (3b) and PIXE (3c) spectra collected from point 9 on sample C5-33iM and the fit lines achieved from the elemental analysis. The corresponding data for point 2 on the C5-33iB disk are presented in Fig. 3, Fig. 3, Fig. 3, respectively. The occurrence of a predominant erosion or re-deposition behaviour at a specific zone of a marker tile is easily identified by observing the W yield in the collected EBS (p-RBS) spectra, which can be transferred into depth profile. Distinct examples of these profiles are observed in the spectra of Fig. 3b, Fig. 3e and in Fig. 4. If a flat and smooth W yield is observed along the entire depth of the sample, we know that the entire W coating was completely eroded from the surface of the marker tile (see the case of Fig. 3b). When a slight decrease of the W yield is observed at a specific depth, we know that a different composition than W partially exist at this depth, as in the case of a lighter and thin Mo interlayer, and the marker layer is identified. This is the case of a soft erosion or re-deposition behaviour (see in Fig. 3e) at the surface. A typical analysis using EMs involves the quantification of the W content above the Mo interlayer. The evaluation of the contents of light elements as B, C and O is hampered by the superposition of the related EBS yields with the W (p-RBS) one. Even so, an enhanced co-deposition of light elements is identified from the corresponding yields (as in spectra in Fig. 3e vs. 3b). In a distinct way, if the W yield clearly decreases along a thick top layer, we know that the W coating was strongly modified by a different composition, and a thick and lighter deposit exists in the surface (EBS spectra in Fig. 4).

Download: Download high-res image (522KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. NRA (a), EBS (b) and PIXE (c) spectra collected from the C5-33iM sample at point 9 (S ∼ 242 mm; eroded surface; see Fig. 2b) and fit lines of the analysis. Corresponding analysis performed in C5-33iB at point 2 (S ∼ 31 mm; thin deposits; d, e, f). NRA performed with incident 2.3 MeV 3He+ ion beams; simultaneous EBS and PIXE analysis performed with incident 2.3 MeV 1H+ beams; NRA, EBS and PIXE detectors positioned at 135°, 150° and 150° angles to the beam directions, respectively.


Download: Download high-res image (71KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. W yield in the EBS spectra collected from the C3-34iK, C4-32iK and C5-33iK disks (S ∼ 200 mm; thick deposits). 2.3 MeV 1H+ incident beams were used; particle detector positioned at 150° to beam direction.

Fig. 3, Fig. 3 identify the nuclear reaction yields in the NRA spectra. The EBS analysis is hampered by the roughness of the exposed surfaces. However, a good correspondence should exist between the resolved EBS and NRA yields. Regarding the PIXE analysis, the fit lines in the output of the GUPIX code [27] do not consider the background counts. Therefore, deviations in the fits resolving the lower yields of the Cr-Kα X-ray lines are only apparent. Besides the signature of W and Mo, PIXE analysis identified chromium (Cr), iron (Fe), copper (Cu) and Nickel (Ni; Ni-Kα at 7.47 keV) as heavier co-deposited impurities in the samples (Fig. 3, Fig. 3).
Fig. 5 shows the comparison of the elemental results quantified at IPP from the central line of the entire EM tiles exposed up to the C3 and C4 campaigns [10] and at IST from the three sets of drilled disks. It presents the quantified W contents above the thin Mo interlayer (5a), the light B, C and O amounts (5b), and the retained 2H amounts (5c) at the surfaces of the inner EM tiles or related drilled disks. The corresponding quantified amounts for the outer EM tiles and related disks are presented in Fig. 5, Fig. 5, Fig. 5. IST results follow the ones presented by IPP. The B, C, O and 2H amounts quantified at IST are typically lower than those of IPP, although the deviations do not interfere with the identification of the predominant erosion and deposition patterns. Nevertheless, the deviations are particular large at the poloidal coordinates corresponding to samples C4-32iK and C5-33iK, within the thick deposition zone nearby ISP (Fig. 5b; S ∼ 200 mm). Noticeable discrepancies also exist at the poloidal positions corresponding to samples C4-20oE and C5-21oE, with S-coordinates nearby the edge of the OSP area (S ∼ 415 mm) (Fig. 5e). From the EBS yields, we clearly identified five distinct zones with well recognized erosion or deposition predominant patterns. The results are discussed below.

Download: Download high-res image (575KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. EBS, RBS and NRA elemental quantifications performed at IST for the drilled disks retrieved from the inner and outer divertor tiles exposed up to C3, C4 and C5 (opened and closed symbols); comparison with the IBA results achieved from the analysis to the entire C3 and C4 tiles at IPP (dashed and continuous lines; see ref. [10]).

From the analysis of the disks retrieved from zone (1) (S ∼ 31 mm) and zone (5) (S ∼ 508 mm), close to the HFS and LFS limits, we recognize the thin deposition zones with low amounts of light elements. The S-coordinates are far away from ISP and OSP. Therefore, it is predicted a lower interaction with the plasma. Nevertheless, the NRA and EBS spectra collected from C4-32iB and C5-33iB evidence a significant deposition behaviour in zone (1) nearby HFS (S ∼ 31 mm), with an increase of B and C contents after C4 and C5.
The analysis of the disks retrieved from zone (3) (S ∼ 237 mm) and zone (4) (S ∼ 415 mm), within the pre-identified ISP and OSP areas, respectively, point to the presence of noticeable erosion zones, which strongly evolve over time, being the presence of the thin Mo interlayer only visible in the EBS spectra after C3 (the behaviour is also visible in the corresponding SIMS depth profiles shown in Fig. 9, Fig. 9, Fig. 9 and in Fig. 9, Fig. 9, Fig. 9; see section 4.2). Regarding the analysis of the C3 disk of zone (3), local variations in the composition should be large on the disk, while the Mo interlayer was not observed at IPP, at a slightly different toroidal coordinate (Fig. 5a; S ∼ 237 mm). After C4 and C5, the Mo interlayer was completely eroded from the analysed disks, revealing a strong erosion behaviour. There is now a clear trend for the deposition of B and C at ISP: B is slightly enhanced after C4 and vanishes afterwards; the opposite trends are observed for C.
In opposition, light deposits are significant in zone (4) at the edge of OSP after C4, and they highly increase after C5 (Fig. 5e; S ∼ 415 mm). The quantified amounts of B on the C4-20oE disk is about the double compared to those found on the C4-20o tile. The deviation may already reflect changes in the re-deposition patterns at these specific S-coordinates, in a different toroidal direction. After the C5 campaign, the corresponding co-deposited amounts for B and C quantified from the C5-21oE disk are even higher. The increase is in line with new results of IPP for the entire C5-21o tile, within the range of the S-coordinate associated to the C5-21oE disk (S ∼ 415 mm; see Fig. 6) [15]. From the depth profiles of W in the EBS spectra, we clearly identify the S-coordinates for this sample within a strong erosion zone. Nevertheless, the new results evidence a significant enhancement of the re-deposition behaviour in the edge of the OSP area, and close to the S ∼ 420 mm range limit of the pre-identified zone (4) [9,10]. At this area, and in agreement with all the studied samples, the presence of B highly increased after C4 due to boronizations, and it continues to increase after C5.

Download: Download high-res image (162KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Elemental quantifications carried out at IST, and corresponding IPP results nearby the S-coordinates for the C5-21oE disk (S ∼ 415 mm).

Finally, the analysis of the disks related to zone (2) (S ∼ 200 mm) prove the existence of a strong deposition zone, evidenced by the significant decrease of the EBS W yield at corresponding depth ranges close to the surface layers (see Fig. 4). The strong deposition of other species than W hinders a possible identification of a Mo interlayer. After C3, the Mo interlayer is already impossible to identify, meaning that another composition than W is present at the superficial layers. After C4 it is observed an increment in the thickness of the deposits. Previous analyses to the thick deposits in the inner tiles revealed the porous and multi-layered stratified structure with thicknesses of more than 10 μm after C3, while even thicker deposits were measured after C4 [9,10]. The increase of the quantified contents for light B, C, O and of 2H agreed with the enhanced deposition behaviour. In this work we verified a significant increase of light co-deposits quantified from the C4 disk. We also observed the delamination of large areas of thick deposits from the C4-32iK surface by reflection transformation imaging [30]. Therefore, and for this specific case, it was possible to quantify the W amount above the Mo interlayer in one of the analysed points of the surface (see in Fig. 5a; s ∼ 204 mm). Large areas of the thick deposits in the entire EM tiles have already shown a crack network with partially peeled off [10]. After C5 we observed like a significant W enrichment in the deposits, particularly by EBS, leading to a lower sensitivity for determining their depths (Fig. 4). C contents slightly increased. In opposition, lower contents of B and O were quantified relative to C4. However, they remain high. Previous analysis to the C4 tiles has already shown that the thick deposits exhibit large variations on their thickness and compositions, ranging from few to several µm nearby S-coordinates close to ISP, i.e., the edge between thick deposits and the eroded area is sharp [9,10]. The behaviour may explain deviations in the contents found in the disks and entire tiles. A similar behaviour was found after C5 [15]. Significant differences in thicknesses of the deposits at the same poloidal S-coordinates were identified by SIMS in zone (2) nearby S ∼ 200 mm. Nevertheless, no W-rich compositions were found (see Section 4.2; Fig. 10). A second explanation for the retrieved IBA results is the aging of the deposits due to the B reactivity with the atmospheric air after the SIMS analysis. Most probably, the porous nature of the deposits makes easier the incorporation of O [10], leading to a lower stability of the deposits and to partial delamination.
Typically, the quantified O contents follow the B ones. The quantified 2H contents remained quite low throughout the campaigns.
The lower hybrid current drive (LHCD) heating system and stainless-steel panels were taken as the main source for Cu [[9], [10], [11],31] and for Cr and Fe [9,31] impurities in the deposits after C3 and C4. The association to stain-less steel would be definitively proven with a quantification of Ni. This is difficult to achieve in W-based layers by X-ray analysis because the Kα emission of Ni (7.48 keV) is overlapped to the Ll emission of W (7.39 keV). Nevertheless, we observed that in presence of higher contents of Cr and Fe, a better fitting procedure was assured with GUPIX (nearby the energy range for W- Ll and Ni-Kα) by including Ni in the sample’s composition (residual analysis) [4,27]. Fig. 7 presents the quantified amounts for the Cr, Fe, Ni and Cu impurities on the C3, C4 and C5 drilled disks. Results for the Ni amounts are given in the examples were the analysis with GUPIX clearly confirmed the presence of Ni. Systematically, the quantified contents for Fe are much higher than those of Cr or Ni, and Ni amounts are systematically lower than those of Cr, i.e., they really correlate with a stainless-steel source. PIXE results are in close agreement with the erosion and deposition-dominated zones achieved from the remaining IBA analysis, with a strong increment of the impurity contents after C4 and C5.

Download: Download high-res image (358KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Cr, Fe, Ni and Cu contents measured in the disks exposed up to the C3 (a) C4 (b) and C5 (c) campaigns.

Apart from zone (2), Cu was absent from the C3 deposits. Zones (1) and (5) are easily identified as thin deposition zones, with events of enhanced contents of the metallic impurities. Zone (3) is clearly an erosion zone with the lower impurity amounts. One more time, and in line with the results shown in Fig. 6, enhanced amounts of the impurities are quantified in zone (4) after C5 (S ∼ 415 mm), in the edge of OSP. Zone (2) presents the highest co-deposited amounts and behaves as a strong deposition zone.
The quantified amounts for Cr, Fe and Cu are significantly lower than the corresponding values found for B, C and O. Moreover, their deposition is not correlated with those of B, C or even O. After C4, the increment of Cr, Fe and Ni in the deposits is lower than the case of B, C and O. After C5, we observe an increase in the Cr, Fe and Ni amounts overall the studied surfaces, from zone (1) to zone (5), while the amounts for B, C and O deposits decreased in some of these locations. In the case of Cu, the discrepancies are higher, while the deposition of Cu evolves faster than those of Cr, Fe and Ni.
The uncertainties of the NRA results depend of many parameters (physical, sample structure, among others) and are too difficult to evaluate. We evaluated them by changing the simulated elemental contents and by observing the corresponding NRA yields using the spectra collected from the C5-21oE disk, with quite significant amounts of co-deposits. Depending of the elemental contents, the uncertainties in the areal densities may increase up to 20 %, 10 % and 5 % for C, B and 2H, respectively. In the thick deposits formed after C4 and C5 we found metallic impurity amounts in the range 0.1–2 wt% by PIXE (minor impurities) with assumed uncertainties up to 10 %. In the other samples lower amounts were found, and the error may increase up to 30 %.
4.2. SIMS vs. Complementary IBA analysis
SIMS depth profiles were normalized aiming a good comparison between the elemental intensities. SIMS depth are given in metric units. In opposition, complementary IBA techniques as EBS or NRA are sensitive to atomic areal densities (expressed in at./cm2), while the real atomic volume densities of the materials remain unknown. Fig. 8 shows the corresponding SIMS and complementary IBA depth profiles achieved from the central points of the C3, C4 and C5 core-disks retrieved from zones (1) and (5), i.e., the ones related to thin deposits. Corresponding data for the erosion zones (3) and (4) are shown in Fig. 9. Examples of the SIMS analysis in thick deposits, zone (2), are shown in Fig. 10. One of the main features of the complementary results is a very good agreement in the elemental depth profiling and in the identification of the Mo marker layers by SIMS and complementary IBA. A very good agreement is also verified for the co-deposition of B and C, with the B amounts largely increasing after C4 due to the boronization discharges. In accordance with PIXE, SIMS also identified the heavier metallic impurities with relatively low elemental intensities. The main disagreements relate with the analysis of C after C3: in the erosion zone (3) with C3-34iM (Fig. 9, Fig. 9) and zone (4) with C3-22oE (Fig. 9, Fig. 9), we observed a surface peak for C with low yield by NRA without correspondence in SIMS; in the thick deposits at zone (2), C3-34iK, significant amounts for C were quantified by NRA, while the related intensities of the SIMS profiles are quite low in the analysed points; the result agrees with the local nature of the thick deposits, with large variations of thickness and composition in a mm scale. Results for the analysed samples are resume below.

Download: Download high-res image (628KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Analysis of thin deposits − SIMS vs. complementary IBA depth profiles achieved from the C3, C4 and C5 disks for: zone (1) at S ∼ 31 mm; zone (5) at S ∼ 508 mm.


Download: Download high-res image (640KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Analysis of eroded areas − SIMS vs. complementary IBA depth profiles achieved from the C3, C4 and C5 disks for: zone (3) at S ∼ 237 mm; zone (4) at S ∼ 415 mm.


Download: Download high-res image (299KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 10. Analysis of thick deposits − SIMS depth profiles achieved from the C3 and C5 disks nearby S ∼ 200 mm, within zone (2).

Analysis of thin deposits − In the thin deposition zones, the maximum Mo content is found at depth ranges close to 1.25 µm nearby the HFS limit, in zone (1) (see Fig. 8, Fig. 8 for SIMS; 8d to 8f for complementary IBA), and from 1.75 µm to 2.0 µm nearby LFS, the zone (5) (corresponding Fig. 8, Fig. 8), with no apparent trend of this variation from C3 to C5 (remember that thickness of the deposited marker layer varied along tiles). The result leads to an easy identification of the erosion interlayer and to the occurrence of a predominant thin deposition pattern in both zones. The interaction of the tiles with the plasma is higher at HFS than in LFS [16], and SIMS profiles confirm a stronger deposition of B and C with enhanced in-depth ranges in zone (1), nearby S ∼ 32 mm: they reveal a high superficial C peak since the C3 campaign (Fig. 8, Fig. 8, Fig. 8); enhanced B peaks are also detected on the surface after C4 (8b) and C5 (8c). The results are confirmed by complementary IBA, revealing higher concentrations and in-depth ranges of B, C and O near the HFS side (8d to 8f). Nearby the LFS, B and C amounts remained reduced overall the entire campaigns (Fig. 8, Fig. 8).
Analysis of eroded areas – In both zone (3) (S ∼ 237 mm) and zone (4) (S ∼ 415 mm), previously described within ISP and OSP, we easily observe that the erosion becomes more prominent over time, while the Mo interlayer is only recognized after C3 (Fig. 9, Fig. 9, Fig. 9, Fig. 9).
Comparably low amounts of co-deposited material are observed in the erosion-dominated zone (3) within ISP, with surface peaks of C (9b to 9f), and the increment of the B content (and of O) after C4 (9b, 9e), which vanish after C5 (9c, 9f). Additionally, after C3, a significant amount of Mo was identified through a depth range down to about 2 µm by SIMS, and this is the maximum average depth range for the Mo interlayer. Moreover, significant contents of Mo are always present at the top layers (9a). EBS analysis point to the same conclusions, while the results agree with a partial removal of the top W coating under irradiation. Part of the Mo interlayer is at the front of the irradiated tile at these S-coordinates. Therefore, Mo is partially quantified over the front layers of the surface.
The progression of a strong erosion behaviour over time can be seen from the analysis of the disks of zone (3) (see the particular dashed red boxes in Fig. 9, Fig. 9). The intensity of the SIMS signal of Mo measured from the C4 disk extremely increases at a depth close to 5 μm up to the end of the depth scan (Fig. 9b). The W signal has the opposite trend, meaning that the depth profiling reached the thick Mo coating deposited on the graphite material (∼3 μm; see Fig. 1b). The prediction also agrees with the profile of C at deeper depths (Fig. 9b; the C source arises from graphite, as shown in Fig. 1b). Similar SIMS depth profiles were measurements from the C5 disk: this time the Mo signal reaches their maxima before the end of the depth scan; the Mo layer is identified closer to the surface at an average depth nearby ∼6.5 μm (9c). The results fully agree with the depth profile of the W yield in the corresponding EBS spectrum collected at the same S-coordinate (not shown), where a lighter composition than W is identified at deeper depths. By considering the integrated time of the plasma discharges over the entire Phase 1 of WEST operation (∼7.3 h), and by analysing the SIMS and EBS profiles achieved from this sample, we evaluate an average net erosion rate within ISP (S ∼ 237 mm) up to the end of the C5 campaign in the range of 0.2–0.3 nm/s. A slightly wider range may be considered in face of the roughness of the irradiated surfaces, which hampers both SIMS and EBS analyses, and of the elemental thicknesses of the pre-deposited coatings in the EM tiles (Fig. 1b). The result is in line with previous evaluations of the erosion rates within ISP and OSP based on complementary SEM and IBA measurements [10]. A similar quantification is difficult to perform from the C4-32iM disk (Fig. 9b): the Mo and C signals achieved by SIMS become enhanced at slightly deeper depths; nevertheless, the corresponding EBS analysis does not identify a Mo-based composition behind the W layer. Even so, we may predict a similar average erosion rate at ISP until the end of the C4 campaign by SIMS (∼6h of plasma exposure from C1 to C4).
It is possible to affirm that for the corresponding S-coordinates nearby ∼ 415 mm, at the edge of the OSP region within zone (4), the average net erosion rate is lower, while the thick Mo layer is never identified by SIMS or by EBS (Fig. 9, Fig. 9). Zone (4) is definitely an erosion area, identified at OSP after C3 [7,8]. Nevertheless, a significant deposition of B is already signalized in the top surface of the disk after C4 (Fig. 9, Fig. 9) and it is highly enhanced after C5 (9i, 9 l). The trend is accomplished by the deposition of C, most of it after C5. The results also agree with a shift in the magnetic ripple previously mentioned in Section 4.1 [16], leading to a significant increase of the deposited material at this S-coordinate after C5. The behaviour is evidenced by SIMS and by complementary EBS-NRA (and even by PIXE). New data of IPP with the analysis of the C5-21 tile nearby this poloidal coordinate also agree with our data [15].
Analysis of thick deposits − The rough morphology of the surfaces of the thick deposits and the deep decrease of the superficial EBS (p-RBS) yields for W makes it challenging to properly quantify the elemental IBA depth profiles (Fig. 4). Therefore, the main information for the elemental depth analysis relates to SIMS. In the measurements after C3, we identify the Mo interlayer at an average depth close to 5 μm (Fig. 10a). After C4, deposits with thickness within the range 10–20 μm are revealed. After the C5 campaign, distinct depth profiles for W were achieved from different analysed points in the surface. Fig. 10b shows one of these profiles where the intensity of the W signal smoothly increases up to 9 μm. The results reflect a zoned variation of both thicknesses and compositions at these coordinates nearby the edge of the ISP region. The intensities of the SIMS depth profiles for B and C became enhanced after C4 and C5. The elemental SIMS profiles are flat with episodes of a preferential elemental co-deposition over depth. NRA confirms the increment of B after C4 and C5. However, the quantified C amounts strongly decreased from C3 to C4, and become enhanced again afterwards. The EBS depth profiles shown in Fig. 4 agree with the expected main evolution for the deposited material after C3 and C4, with an increment of the lighter deposited material, particularly B and O. After C5, we observe like a decrease in the lighter deposits. The result may reflect a preferential re-deposition of W at the analysed coordinates, in agreement with the smooth evolution of the corresponding p-RBS depth profile for W in the spectra (Fig. 4). Nevertheless, a peel-off mechanism may have occurred induced by the aging of the layers. Even so, the possible flacking events do not change the main conclusions of the analysis.
The quantified retained contents of 2H were higher at the thick deposits. Nevertheless, they remained low and are in line with the remaining quantifications. Similar results are evidenced by the SIMS profiles. The proximity of the ISP, with a higher heat flux, and a particular zoned composition of the layers may lead to localized desorption events.
4. Summary
Erosion marker tiles were positioned on selected locations at the lower divertor of WEST were the toroidal magnet ripples reach their maxima, and exposed over the Phase 1 of operation, from the C1 campaign until the end of C3, C4 and C5. The analysis to the entire C3, and also C4 tiles, identified the main erosion and deposition zones induced by the X-point plasma configuration along the poloidal positions: two strong erosion areas were located at the ISP and OSP, a strong deposition area was located in the vicinity of ISP towards the HFS limit, and thin deposition zones were identified at the remaining locations, particularly nearby the HFS and LFS limits. Afterwards, core-drilled disks were retrieved from the tiles and sent for further analysis at different laboratories to supplement the earlier analyses in more detail. In our case we received drilled disks representative of the five dominant zones exposed up to the end of C3, C4 and C5 for SIMS and complementary IBA analyses. SIMS measurements followed the central line of the tiles, and complementary IBA, namely EBS, PIXE, NRA and RBS (for normalization of NRA yields), were carried close to the craters induced by SIMS. The main results of the experiment are resumed below:
•
The new experiments confirmed the erosion and deposition-dominated areas previously noticed at the same S-coordinates after the analysis to the entire C3 and C4 erosion tiles.
•
PIXE analysis reveals the same erosion and deposition behaviour along the S-coordinate, the correlation between the Fe, Cr and Ni contents with a stainless-steel source; Cu amounts evolves differently over time.
•
SIMS and EBS-NRA elemental depth profiles obtained from the analysis to the eroded samples and thin deposits strongly agree, evidencing the sensitivity and complementarity of the techniques.
•
In the analysis of the thick deposition zone, SIMS reveals thick deposits with a light composition after C4 and C5, while EBS-NRA point to relatively lower thickness and heavier compositions, particularly after C5, most probably due to a partial flacking of the deposits.
Hereafter, we state that the quantified O amounts followed those achieved for B. It is difficult to discuss about the origin of O: they may relate to co-deposited amounts in WEST and to the incorporation of O due to B oxidation after exposition to atmospheric air.
Thin deposits were found at S-coordinates close to the HFS and LFS tile limits, nearby S ∼ 31 mm and S ∼ 508 mm, respectively. The Mo interlayer was identified after C3, C4 and C5 at similar depth ranges, i.e., erosion events were quite absent at these locations. It was not signalized a straightforward trend in the deposition of B or C over time nearby the LFS limit. In opposition, the deposition of C, and most of all of B, due to glow discharges for boronization, was highly enhanced after C4 and slightly increased after C5 close to HFS.
A predominant erosion pattern was observed within the predicted ISP (S ∼ 237 mm) and OSP (S ∼ 415 mm) areas. The erosion evolved over time: it was weak after C3, while the marker interlayer was clearly identified, and became prominent after C4 and C5 up to the point where the Mo interlayer has been completely eroded. Based on the SIMS and EBS analysis, an average net erosion rate within the range of 0.2–0.3 nm/s was predicted at ISP for the entire Phase 1 of WEST. Even so, a slight deposition mechanism is identified at ISP, without a visible trend for B and C over time. In opposition, a significant deposition trend is clearly visible nearby S ∼ 415 mm, in the edge of OSP towards the LFS limit, with enhanced deposition of B after C4, and of B and C after C5. Most probably, the behaviour results from changes in the location of the net erosion and re-deposition areas, shifted poloidally at the end of Phase 1.
A strong deposition behaviour exists at S-coordinates close to 200 mm. As in the remaining poloidal positions, the behaviour was only moderate after C3 and became strongly magnified after C4 and C5, as observed from the elemental SIMS and EBS depth profiles. In this case, the data are in line with significant variations in the final thicknesses and compositions of the thick deposits at the edge of ISP. As predicted, the co-deposition of B was extremely enhanced after C4, as result of the boronization discharges occurred in this period, and remain significant after C5, as confirmed by SIMS and NRA. The heavier compositions revealed in the last IBA analyses performed at IST may result from a partial flacking of enriched B films due to oxidation. The behaviour needs to be investigated in detail in future activities.
Low retained 2H amounts were quantified from the disks overall the campaigns. Even so, enhanced amounts were measured in the thick deposits.
Apart the Mo source present in the standard and erosion markers, Cr, Fe, Ni and Cu were identified as the main heavier metallic impurities in the deposits by PIXE. In complement to the previous analysis, the corresponding co-deposited amounts lead to the identification of thin deposition areas with localized events of enhanced redeposition of these metals nearby the HFS and LFS limits. ISP behaves as a typical erosion area with lower amounts of these deposits. The edge of OSP, towards the LFS limit, is definitively signalised as an erosion zone and by an enhanced deposition after C5. Finally, at the S-coordinates nearby 200 mm we recognize a strong deposition region for Cr, Fe, Ni and Cu. Clearly, Cr, Fe and Ni have a stainless-steel source, as confirmed by the systematic and corresponding co-deposited amounts: higher in the case of Fe; lower for Ni. Nevertheless, the deposits of these impurities are significantly lower than those achieved for B, C and O. Their deposition is not correlated with B, C or O and evolves differently over time. In the same way, the deposition of the stainless-steel components and of Cu are not correlated, while the Cu deposits evolve faster.