Abstract
The cold plate design is an important factor for battery thermal management systems. An efficient cold plate design should have the ability to lower the battery temperature with minimum pressure drop. In this work, a double serpentine channel (DSC) cold plate is designed to improve the thermal performance of a single serpentine channel (SSC) cold plate under various operating conditions. Experimental and numerical investigations are done to compare the performance of both cooling plates. Results showed that the maximum temperature and temperature difference of a battery with a DSC cold plate is lower than the SSC cold plate. Additionally, the heat transfer rate was also improved under the same flow rate. Moreover, the performance of the DSC cold plate design is compared with the SSC cold plate under different flow rates, ambient temperature, coolant inlet temperature, and discharge rates. Results indicate that the DSC cold plate can reduce the maximum temperature, and temperature difference of a battery by 6.4 % and 41 % respectively. Besides, the power consumption with the DSC cold plate is reduced by 86.7 % when compared with the SSC cold plate under the flow rate of 120 mL/min.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Serpentine channelDouble channel cold plateLiquid coolingThermal managementLithium ion battery
Nomenclature
area (
)
specific heat capacity (J
)
factor of safety
h
average grid spacing
)
m
mass (kg)
mass flow rate (kg.
)
p
pressure (Pa)
pump power consumption (W)
Q
heat (W)
q
heat generation rate 
)
r
refinement ratio
T
temperature (°C)
t
time (s)
velocity of liquid (m
)
V
volume (
)
Greek symbols
ρ
density (kg.
)
λ
thermal conductivity 
)
μ
dynamic viscosity of coolant (pa.s)
Δ
change in variable
gradient
relative error
Subscripts
b
battery
c
cold plate
in
inlet
l
liquid
max
maximum
out
outlet
Acronyms
BTMS
battery thermal management system
C-rate
current rate
CNC
computer numerical control
DSC
double serpentine channel
EV
electric vehicles
GCI
grid convergence index
LIB
lithium ion battery
PCM
phase change material
SSC
single serpentine channel
1. Introduction
Due to the energy crisis and the shortage of fossil fuels, there is an increasing need for electric vehicles (EV) [1,2]. In comparison to lead-acid and nickel-based batteries, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are the best choice for use in EV energy storage due to their lighter weight, higher energy density, lower self-discharge rates, higher specific power, higher recyclability, and longer cycle life [3,4]. During operation, LIBs produce a large amount of heat, and if the heat is not dissipated, it may reduce the battery life span and even cause a thermal runway [5,6]. The recommended temperature range of LIBs is 20 °C to 40 °C [7,8] and the temperature difference should be lower than 5 °C [9]. Therefore, an effective and efficient battery thermal management system (BTMS) is necessary for battery safety [10].
Existing BTMS techniques include air cooling [11,12], liquid cooling [13,14], phase change material (PCM) [15,16], and heat pipe [17,18], etc. The air cooling method is most commonly used for small battery packs due to its lower heat transfer capability than other cooling methods [19]. The liquid cooling system is widely used due to its higher heat conducting capacity than the air cooling system and less pumping power [20]. The PCM can absorb and release large amounts of latent heat but it has a limitation of lower thermal conductivity [21,22]. The heat pipe cooling system has good thermal conductivity but has limitations of high cost and system complexity [23]. Among other cooling methods, liquid cooling is widely used due to its higher thermal conductivity and better cooling effect [24].
The liquid cooling system is further divided into direct contact and indirect contact liquid cooling systems. In a direct contact cooling system the cooling fluid such as mineral oil is used as a coolant and the batteries are immersed in the coolant [25]. Indirect contact liquid cooling system the cold plates are attached to the battery and fluid flows inside a mini channel to conduct heat from the battery [26]. However, there are limitations of direct contact liquid cooling systems such as leakage and short circuits may occur if improper insulation and packaging are not used [27]. Wang et al. [28] optimized serpentine channel cold plates using surrogate assisted approach. The results showed that using inlet and outlet ports on one side of the battery can control the temperature of the module and decrease the pressure drop. His multi-objective optimization scheme improved temperature uniformity and reduced the power consumption. Kong et al. [29] improved the performance of cold plates by using divergent shaped mini channel cold plates. Results showed that a cold with dual inlets and a single outlet reduces the flow resistance and maximum temperature. The divergent shape cold plate can reduce the pressure drop by 7.2 % and the maximum temperate difference was limited to 3.19 K. Xu et al. [30] studied the influence of climatic and operating conditions of a T-shape bifurcation cold plate on the side of the large capacity battery module. From the results, it is concluded that multiple cold plates can be used for better temperature uniformity and proper coolant distribution. Patil et al. [31] investigated experimentally and numerically the performance of U-type micro channel and their results showed that by comparing the original layout channel in U-type microchannel maximum temperature and temperature difference decreased by 32.2 % and 950.1 % respectively. Monika et al. [32] designed a cold plate with multi stage tesla valve and improved the temperature gradient in turbulent flow cases. The results showed that the heat transfer was improved with the reverse flow tesla valve. A cold plate with 4 mini channels and a valve distance of 8.82 mm showed the best cooling performance. Li et al. [33] numerically investigated the performance of U-shaped, airfoil, convex, and honey comb structures. His results indicated that the convex structure cooling plate has better cooling performance and high heat transfer capability than other structures. Deng et al. [34] investigated the performance of the serpentine channel cold plate and their results indicated that the 5-channel cold plate had the best performance and the maximum temperature was reduced by 26 °C when compared with the 2-channel cold plate. Li et al. [35] experimentally investigated the performance of silicon plate and copper tubes with four different configurations. The results showed that the cooling system with copper tubes can decrease the power consumption by 47.4 % when compared with the forced air convection system. Wu et al. [36] used step allocated scheme for large battery packs. Results showed that the maximum temperature and temperature difference of the 3S1P pack can be controlled at 33.8 °C and 4.56 °C under a 5C discharge rate. Xu et al. [37] proposed a wrench shaped cold plate for cylindrical batteries. The wrench shaped cold plate helped to reduce the pressure drop by 31.86 % and the weight of the cold plate by 20.8 % when compared with the straight mini channel cold plate. Deng et al. [38] improved the performance of conventional single serpentine channel cold plates by using a double layer bifurcating channel. His results showed the double layer cold plate had better temperature uniformity. An increase in width and higher flow rates can lower the battery temperature but at the expense of power consumption. Jarret el al. [39] designed a single serpentine channel cold plate to lower the temperature of the battery by varying channel width and position. Results showed that the single channel design can lower the battery temperature and pressure drop but at the cost of temperature uniformity. Sheng et al. [40] numerically investigated the performance of serpentine channel liquid cooling plates by using double inlets and outlets to optimize the problem of undesirable temperature distribution in the cell. Results showed that location of inlet and outlet has a great influence of the temperature distribution and power consumption. Increasing the flow rate can lower the battery temperature but it has less effect on the temperature distribution. Though, the channel width has a great impact on the power consumption but has lower effect on the maximum temperature. Monika et al. [41] improved the performance of straight mini channel cold plate by changing the inlet and outlet positions. Results showed that the cold plate with 5 channels and coolant inlet port near to the tabs region shows the best performance. Xie et al. [42] designed single serpentine channel liquid cooling plate for large battery modules. His results showed that using two large cold plates on top and bottom of the battery module can make the system light weight and the maximum temperature and temperature difference of the battery module was below 31.8 °C and 3.7 °C under flow rate and plate thickness of 0.27 m/s and 4 mm, respectively. Liu et al. [43] designed two cold plates by using fluid topology optimization method and compared the performance of the cold plate with conventional designed cold plates. Results showed that the new designed cold plates have 70 % lower pressure drop and the temperature uniformity was improved by 46.7 %. Zhang et al. [44] compared the performance of straight channel and inclined channel cold plates under different operating conditions. Results showed that the performance of inclined channel cold plate was better than straight channel cold plate. The pressure loss of inclined cold plate was lower than straight channel cold plate and j/f factor of straight channel cold plate was improved by 79.64 % when the inclined angle was 15 0.
However, an efficient BTMS must be light weight, compact design, low cost, low power consumption, and should have good thermal performance [[45], [46], [47]]. Conventional serpentine channels normally use single cooling channel [48,49]. To address the issues explored in the existing literature, in this paper, the performance of a conventional single serpentine channel cold plate is improved by a double serpentine channel cold plate, by using two copper tubes between the channels for the fluid flow. The experimental and numerical method is used to compare the performance of both cold plates. The maximum temperature (
), temperature difference (
) and power consumption of the both designed cold plates are investigated and compared under various operating conditions. A 3D numerical model is build and verified with experimental results. Additionally, the effect of varying flow rate, ambient temperature, coolant temperature and discharge rates on LIB is studied. This work provides an efficient energy saving approach for BTMS.
The remainder of the paper is as follows: Firstly, the experimental setup is built. Then the performance of both cold plates is experimentally compared. Moreover, the performance of both cold plates is numerically investigated and validated. Furthermore, the numerical model is used to compare the performance of both cold plates under different flow rates, ambient temperature, coolant temperature, and discharge rates. Lastly, the key conclusions are drawn.
2. Experimental setup
2.1. Design of the BTMS
The battery liquid cooling model is shown in Fig. 1. Fig. 1(a) shows the design of the cold plate with a copper tube. Lithium ion pouch battery is taken as a test object, with a nominal capacity of 10 Ah and voltage of 3.7 V. The battery size and parameters are shown in Table 1. Two cold plates named single serpentine channel (SSC) and double serpentine channel (DSC) are attached on both sides of the battery forming a cooling system as shown in Fig. 1(b). The size of the cold plate is the same as the size of the battery with a thickness of 2.5 mm. A copper tube with an inlet diameter of 1.5 mm is placed in each of the cold plates for the fluid flow.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (149KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Battery cooling model: (a) cold plate with copper tube, (b) cooling system.

Table 1. Battery parameters [50].

Parameter	Values
Size	120*67*12 (mm)
Nominal voltage	3.7 V
Nominal capacity	10 Ah
Cut off voltage	2.7–4.2 V
Density	2543.9 kg 
Specific heat capacity	1679 
Thermal conductivity	3.3 
Mass	0.23 kg
2.2. Cold plate design
Fig. 2(a) shows the battery test section. The battery is sandwiched between 2 cold plates and covered with extended polystyrene foam, to make it thermally insulated. The acrylic plates are tightened on the top and bottom sides with the help of nuts and bolts. Fig. 2(b) shows the location of the thermocouples. The thermocouples were attached to both sides of the battery on the middle surface because it is difficult to dissipate heat from the center and the temperature is maximum at the center of the battery [51].
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (134KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. (a) Battery test section, (b) Thermocouple location.

The cold plate is made up of Aluminum 6061 and manufactured by CNC machining. The cold plate design and dimensions are shown in the Fig. 3. A copper tube with an inlet diameter of 1.5 mm is placed in the serpentine channels of both cold plates. The performance of both designed cold plates is evaluated under various working conditions.
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (246KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Cold plate design and dimensions: (a) SSC, (b) DSC.

2.3. System description
Fig. 4 shows the experimental setup. The experimental system consists of a gear pump, rotameter, cooling tank, battery cycler, data acquisition unit, and T-type thermocouples. The schematic view and the experimental apparatus are shown in Fig. 4(a), (b). The inlet temperature of the water is kept at 25 °C using a water bath. Gear pump is used for the coolant distribution at the flow rate of 120 mL/min. The flow rate of the coolant is measured by a rotameter which has a range of (16–120 mL/min). The arbin battery charge/discharge cycler is used to charge the battery at constant current and constant voltage (CC-CV) mode. The voltage and current accuracy of the battery cycler is 
0.01 % of full scale (FS). The battery is charged at a 1C rate and discharged at a 3C rate. The data acquisition unit records the temperature data of T-type thermocouples with an accuracy of 
0.1 °C. The battery surfaces are insulted by extended polystyrene foam to prevent heat loss to the environment. The heat transfer rate of both cold plates is measured under the same working conditions. The heat brought by the coolant (
) is calculated by:
(1)
where 
is the mass flow rate of coolant, 
 is the specific heat of coolant, 
 and 
 are the outlet and inlet temperatures of the coolant, respectively.
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (265KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Experimental setup: (a) Schematic view, (b) Experiment apparatus.

2.4. Battery heat generation
The temperature of the battery under no cooling conditions was measured by using thermocouples attached to the center surfaces of the battery on both sides. The temperature difference between the thermocouples at the end of discharge was only 0.6 °C, therefore temperature data from only one side was considered. Fig. 5(a) shows the battery temperature under different discharge rates at 25 °C ambient temperature.
Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (180KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. (a) Temperature under different discharge rates, (b) Fitting curve under 3C discharge rate.

The heat generation of the battery is measured using the following equation [52]:
(2)
(3)
where Q,q,
,m are the heat, heat generation rate, specific capacity and mass of the battery. ΔT is the temperature difference, T and t are the battery temperature and discharge time, respectively.
Fig. 5(b) shows the fitting curve when the battery is discharged under a 3C rate. The 
 is calculated by the slope of the T-t curve. The fitting formula of the curve is expressed as:
(4)
The heat generation of the battery discharged at a 3C rate is calculated q = 11.9 W using Eq. (3).
3. Simulation methodology
3.1. Numerical simulation and model validation
The numerical investigation of the proposed model is done on ANSYS 2020 software. The cold plate is assumed to be homogenous and the material of the cold plate is aluminum. Water is used as a coolant and the maximum Reynolds number is less than 2300, so a laminar flow model is used. Velocity inlet and outflow boundary conditions are used. The properties of the material used in the simulation are given in Table 2. The ambient temperature is set as 25 °C and the side surfaces of the battery are set as a convective heat transfer coefficient of 5 
 [53]. The heat generation from the battery active material is considered only. For numerical simplicity following assumptions are considered:
a)
The heat generation inside the cell is uniformly distributed.
b)
The effect of gravity is ignored.
c)
The thermal contact resistance is ignored.
d)
The thermal conductivity and specific heat capacity of the battery are uniform.
Table 2. Material properties.

Material	Density
ρ (kg 
)	Specific heat
 (J 
 
)	Thermal conductivity
(W 
)	Viscosity
(Pa s)
Aluminum	2719	871	202.4	–
Water	998.2	4128	0.6	
Copper	8978	381	387.6	–
To verify the accuracy of the numerical model used in the simulations, the comparison between experimental and simulation results is shown in Fig. 6. The battery is discharged under a 3C rate at the flow rate of 120 mL/min. The inlet temperature of the water and ambient temperature are kept at 25 °C. The overall maximum relative error between the experimental and simulation results is 1.32 %. From the results, it can be seen that the error is in the acceptable range which shows the accuracy of the numerical model.
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (163KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Comparison between experimental and simulation results.

3.2. Governing equations and grid independence test
The battery is assumed a solid block with uniform heat generation. The thermal conductivity and specific heat of the battery are considered uniform. The energy balance for the battery heat generation is given as:
(5)
where 
 is the heat generation rate of the battery, 
 is the density, 
 is the thermal conductivity, 
 is the heat capacity and the T represents the temperature.
The energy conservation of the cold plate is as follows:
(6)
where 
denotes the density of the cold plate, 
denotes the heat capacity of the cold plate, and 
is the thermal conductivity of the cold plate.
The mass conservation, momentum, and energy conservation of coolant are given as follows:
(7)
(8)
(9)
whereas 
 denotes the density of coolant, 
denotes the heat capacity of coolant, 
denotes the thermal conductivity of coolant, 
is the velocity of coolant.
The pump power consumption is calculated by:
(10)
(11)
where 
is the pressure drop, 
 is the inlet area, 
 is the inlet velocity, 
 and 
 are the inlet and outlet pressure, respectively.
In order to ensure the accuracy of simulation results the grid independence test is done under a flow rate of 40 mL/min and a 3C discharge rate for a battery with an SSC cold plate. The inlet temperature of water and ambient temperature are kept at 25 °C. In comparison with hexahedron and tetrahedron mesh grids, polyhedron mesh provides more cells with fast computing speed [27]. Therefore, the polyhedral mesh was adopted. The grid number ranges from 
to 
were chosen and the result of grid independent test is shown in Fig. 7. It can be seen that when the grid number was increased from 1,397,046 to 1,923,095 the maximum temperature difference was only 0.05 %. Therefore, in order to save computational time and accuracy of the numerical simulation the grid size 1,397,046 was used in this study.
Fig. 7
Download: Download high-res image (97KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Grid independent test.

The grid independent test is further discussed by grid convergence index (GCI) [54,55]. The GCI is defined as:
(12)
where 
 is factor of safety, the value is 1.25 for comparison of three or more grids. 
is the rate of convergence, its value is 1.97 for the second order method. 
is the relative error is defined as:
(13)
where 
 and 
 are the results of fine and coarse grids.
The average grid spacing 
 is used to calculate the grid refinement ratio r. The grid refinement ratio is defined as:
(14)
where 
 is the volume of the grid cell and N is the number of elements for grid cells. The GCI of the six kinds of grids used is shown in Table 3. It can be seen that the GCI of grid number 1397046 is 0.52 % which is less than 3 %, which satisfies the GCI criteria [56].
Table 3. GCI for different grids.

Grid Number
N	
r	
GCI(%)
1,255,625	0.0516	1.007	0.00349	30.11
1,283,452	0.0512	1.014	0.00554	24.28
1,339,689	0.0505	1.014	0.00147	6.58
1,397,046	0.0498	1.035	0.00029	0.52
1,550,264	0.0481	–	–	–
1,923,095	0.0448	–	–	–
4. Results and discussion
4.1. Comparison of cold plate design and voltage drop during discharge
Fig. 8(a) shows the discharge voltage curves under 1Csingle bond3C discharge rates with no cooling conditions. The battery discharge test is done under the ambient temperature of 25 °C. It can be seen that the battery voltage during discharge decreases when the discharge rate increases. The discharge time of the battery decreases as more current is drawn as expected. Fig. 8(b) shows the comparison of the SSC and DSC cold plates under 120 mL/min flow rate. It can be seen that the temperature of the battery at the end of discharge for SSC and DSC cold plate design is 30.8 °C and 29.6 °C, respectively, under the 3C discharge rate. Fig. 9(a) and (b) shows the performance analysis of SSC and DSC cold plates, respectively. The heat removal rates of both cold plates were calculated using Eq. (1). The temperature at the end of discharge is close to each other in both designed cold plates, but the heat removal rate of DSC is increased by 14.9 % under the same flow rate. The 
 in both designs of cold plates rise slowly at the initial stage of discharge, and 
 of both designs increases at the end of discharge, due to the higher resistance at the end of discharge resulting in an increase in the temperature of the battery.
Fig. 8
Download: Download high-res image (180KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. (a) Discharge voltage curves, (b) Comparison of SSC and DSC cold plate.

Fig. 9
Download: Download high-res image (280KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Performance analysis: (a) SSC, (b) DSC.

4.2. Simulation results and analysis
4.2.1. Effect of flow rate
Fig. 10 shows the temperature curves under different flow rates. The ambient temperature and coolant inlet temperature were kept at 25 °C. Fig. 10(a) shows the 
 curves under different flow rates. It can be seen that as the flow rate increases the 
 of the battery decreases in both designs, as more heat is taken away by the coolant. However, the DSC cold plate has a lower temperature than the SSC cold plate under varying flow rates. When the flow rate was increased from 40 mL/min to 120 mL/min, the 
 was reduced by 8.5 %, 7.6 %, and 6.4 %, respectively, when DSC cold plate was used. Fig. 10(b) shows the 
 curves under varying flow rates. It can be seen that the 
 of the SSC cold plate is higher than the DSC cold plate under the same flow rate conditions. At lower flow rates of 40 mL/min and 80 mL/min the 
 is 6.39 °C and 5.87 °C, respectively, which is higher than the safe limit. However, the 
 of the DSC cold plate is much lower when compared with the SSC cold plate. The 
 was reduced by 41 % when the DSC cold plate was used at the flow rate of 120 mL/min. Fig. 11 shows the temperature contour of the battery section under different flow rates. It can be seen that at the flow rate of 40 mL/min, the SSC cold plate has the 
 at the bottom surface of the battery, whereas the temperature distribution was much better in the DSC cold plate under the same flow rate. This means that the DSC cold plate has a better temperature distribution than the SSC cold plate under the same flow rate.
Fig. 10
Download: Download high-res image (336KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 10. Temperature curves under different flow rates: (a) 
, (b) 
.

Fig. 11
Download: Download high-res image (198KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 11. Temperature contours of the battery section under different flow rates.

Fig. 12 shows the power consumption comparison under different flow rates. It can be seen that as the flow rate increases the power consumption increases, hence more fluid is required to take away the heat. However, the power consumption of the DSC cold plate is lower than SSC under each flow rate. Table 4 shows the comparison of SSC and DSC cold plate design under different flow rates. It is observed that the 
 and 
 of the battery with DSC cold at the end of discharge is lower than the SSC cold plate. Moreover, at the flow rate of 120 mL/min, the battery with a DSC cold plate can reduce the 
, 
 and power consumption by 6.4 %, 41 %, and 86.7 % respectively.
Fig. 12
Download: Download high-res image (193KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 12. Power consumption comparison under different flow rates.

Table 4. Comparison of 
 and 
 of battery with SSC and DSC cold plate designs at the end of discharge under different flow rates.

Parameter	Flow rate (mL/min)
40	80	120
 (°C)	SSC	34.04	32.93	31.36
DSC	31.14	30.41	29.35
 (°C)	SSC	6.39	5.87	4.78
DSC	3.73	3.37	2.82
4.2.2. Effect of coolant inlet temperature
The coolant inlet temperature has also a significant effect on the battery temperature. In this section, the inlet temperature of the water is varied from 20 °C to 30 °C with an interval of 5 °C. The ambient temperature and flow rate are kept constant at 25 °C and 120 mL/min, respectively. The temperature curves under different inlet temperatures are shown in Fig. 13. Fig. 13(a) compares the 
 curves. It can be seen that as the inlet temperature increases the battery temperature tends to increase in both cold plate designs, and a lower inlet temperature results in a lower battery temperature. However, at lower inlet temperatures the 
 of the battery increases. Fig. 13(b) shows the 
 curves of the battery. It can be seen that at lower inlet temperatures the 
 increases until 400 s. After, 400 s the temperature of the battery tends to decrease and then kept steady till the end of discharge. The battery temperature increases when the inlet temperature decreases resulting in poor temperature distribution in the battery. The 
 of the battery with an SSC cold plate at the end of discharge at 30 °C inlet is 4.73 °C, whereas with a DSC cold plate is only 2.78 °C. The higher the 
 means more pumping power is required to cool down the battery.
Fig. 13
Download: Download high-res image (263KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 13. Temperature curves under different inlet temperatures: (a) 
, (b) 
.

Fig. 14 shows the temperature contour of the battery section under different inlet temperatures. It can be seen that at 30 °C inlet temperature, the temperature of the battery with the SSC cold plate reached 36.29 °C, whereas the temperature of the battery with the DSC cold plate was 34.30 °C. It means that the battery with an SSC cold plate is not suitable for higher inlet temperatures. Table 5 shows the comparison of 
 and 
 of a battery with SSC and DSC cold plate design under different inlet temperatures. It is observed that the 
 and 
 of the battery with DSC cold at the end of discharge is lower than the SSC cold plate. The 
 and 
 is reduced by 5.4 % and 41.2 %, respectively, at the end of discharge at 30 °C inlet temperature. It means that the battery with a DSC cold plate has better temperature uniformity than a battery with an SSC cold plate under different coolant inlet temperatures.
Fig. 14
Download: Download high-res image (189KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 14. Temperature contours of the battery section under different inlet temperatures.

Table 5. Comparison of 
 and 
 of battery with SSC and DSC cold plate designs at the end of discharge under different inlet temperature.

Parameter	Inlet temperature (°C)
20	25	30
(°C)	SSC	26.44	31.36	36.29
DSC	24.40	29.35	34.30
(°C)	SSC	4.84	4.78	4.73
DSC	2.85	2.82	2.78
4.2.3. Effect of ambient temperature
The thermal behaviors of a battery widely depend upon the ambient temperature. A high ambient temperature may increase the battery temperature and sometime may cause thermal runway. However, a low ambient temperature also affects the battery life. Therefore in this section, the effect of ambient temperature on the battery performance is studied. The ambient temperature is varied from 10 °C to 30 °C with an interval of 10 °C. The battery is discharged under a 3C rate and the inlet temperature of coolant and flow rate are kept at 25 °C and 120 mL/min, respectively. Temperature curves under different ambient temperatures are shown in Fig. 15. Fig. 15(a) compares the 
 curves. It can be seen that as the ambient temperature increases the battery temperature tends to increase in both cold plate designs, and lower ambient temperature results in lower battery temperature. The temperature of a battery with an SSC cold plate increases till 600 s, after that the temperature becomes steady, whereas in a battery with a DSC cold plate, the temperature increases at the start of discharge till 400 s, after that the temperature becomes steady till the end of discharge. However, a battery with a DSC cold plate performs better than an SSC cold plate even at higher ambient temperatures. Fig. 15(b) shows the 
 curves of a battery under different ambient temperatures. It can be seen that when the ambient temperature increases the 
 increases. Higher 
 means poor temperature distribution in the battery. in addition, the 
 of a battery with a DSC cold plate is, lower than a battery with an SSC cold plate. The 
 at the end of discharge at 30 °C ambient temperature in SSC and DSC cold plates are 4.84 °C and 2.75 °C, respectively.
Fig. 15
Download: Download high-res image (347KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 15. Temperature curves under different ambient temperatures: (a) 
, (b) 
.

Fig. 16 shows the temperature contours of the battery section under different ambient temperatures. It can be seen that at lower ambient conditions the temperature of a battery with both cold plate designs are lower, as the ambient temperature increases the battery temperature increases with both cold plate designs. It means that at higher ambient temperatures the battery with an SSC cold plate has poor temperature distribution as compared to the battery with a DSC cold plate. Table 6 shows the comparison of 
 and 
 under different ambient temperatures of a battery with SSC and DSC cold plate. It can be seen that the 
 of a battery with a DSC cold plate is lower than that with an SSC cold plate. In addition the 
 reduced 6.2 %, 6.3 %, 6.4 %, respectively, when the ambient temperature is increased from 10 °C to 30 °C. Whereas, the 
 of a battery with a DSC cold plate is also reduced by 41.3 %, 40.4 %, and 42.7 % when the temperature is increased from 10 °C to 30 °C.
Fig. 16
Download: Download high-res image (204KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 16. Temperature contours of the battery section under different ambient temperatures.

Table 6. Comparison of 
 and 
 of battery with SSC and DSC cold plate designs at the end of discharge under different ambient temperatures.

Parameter	Ambient temperature (°C)
10	20	30
 (°C)	SSC	31.16	31.30	31.44
DSC	29.20	29.30	29.40
 (°C)	SSC	4.64	4.78	4.84
DSC	2.71	2.82	2.75
4.2.4. Effect of discharge rate
The battery generates more heat at higher discharge rates. In order to compare the performance of both cold plates, the battery is discharged at the rate of 3C and 4C. The flow rate and the ambient temperature are kept at 120 mL/min and 25 °C, respectively. Temperature curves under different discharge rates are shown in Fig. 17. Fig. 17(a) compares the 
 curves of a battery with SSC and DSC cold plate under different discharge rates. It can be seen that when the battery is discharged at a 3C rate the 
 of the battery with the SSC cold plate reached 31.36 °C at the end of discharge, whereas with the DSC cold plate, it was 29.35 °C. When the discharge rate increased to 4C the battery generates more heat and the 
 of the battery with the SSC cold plate reached 34.9 °C, whereas with the DSC cold plate, it was 31.8 °C. Fig. 14(b) shows the 
 curves under different discharge rates. It can be seen that under higher discharge rates the 
 of a battery with an SSC cold plate is higher than the safe limit. The 
 at the end of discharge of a battery with SSC cold plate reached 7.51 °C. Whereas with the DSC cold plate the 
 reached 4.41 °C. The 
 of a battery with a DSC cold plate is lower than an SSC cold plate under high discharge rates. This means that the temperature distribution under a higher discharge rate is more uniform with the DSC cold plate.
Fig. 17
Download: Download high-res image (243KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 17. Temperature curves under different discharge rates: (a) 
, (b) 
.

Fig. 18 shows the temperature contours of a battery section under different discharge rates. It can be seen that the at 4C discharge rate the temperature is higher at the bottom of the battery with an SSC cold plate, whereas the temperature distribution is much better when a DSC cold plate is used with a battery. It means that under higher discharge rates SSC cold plate is not capable of lowering the battery temperature to safe limits. Table 7 shows the comparison of 
 and 
 of a battery with SSC and DSC cold plate designs at the end of discharge under different discharge rates. It can be seen that the 
 and 
 of a battery with a DSC cold plate is lower than that of an SSC cold plate design. The 
 and 
 is reduced by 8.8 % and 41.3 %, respectively, under 4C discharge. It means that the battery with a DSC cold plate has a more uniform temperature distribution than a battery with an SSC cold plate under higher discharge rates.
Fig. 18
Download: Download high-res image (215KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 18. Temperature contours of the battery section under different discharge rates.

Table 7. Comparison of 
 and 
 of battery with SSC and DSC cold plate designs at the end of discharge under different discharge rates.

Parameter	Discharge rate
3C	4C
 (°C)	SSC	31.36	34.98
DSC	29.35	31.81
 (°C)	SSC	4.78	7.51
DSC	2.82	4.41
4.2.5. Temperature distribution in a battery module
In this section, the comparison of both SSC and DSC cold plates are compared under fixed operating conditions. Six batteries and 7 cold plates are used to form a battery module. Fig. 19 shows the temperature distribution contours of the module. It can be seen that when SSC cold plates are used the 
 appears at the center of the module. Whereas, when DSC cold plates are used the temperature distribution is more uniform. Fig. 20 shows the temperature comparison of a battery module. From Fig. 20(a), it can be noted that when SSC cold plates are used the 
 of the battery module reaches 35.7 °C, whereas the temperature of the battery module with DSC cold plate is 30.7 °C, which is 14 % lower than SSC cold plate design. From Fig. 20(b) it can be noted that the 
 curves of the battery module with SSC cold plate is 7.19 °C, which is not within a range for a safe temperature limit, whereas the 
 of a battery module with DSC cold plates reaches 2.6 °C, which is 63.8 % lower than the SSC cold plate design.
Fig. 19
Download: Download high-res image (226KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 19. Temperature distribution contours of the battery module.

Fig. 20
Download: Download high-res image (99KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 20. Temperature comparison in a module; (a) 
, (b) 
.

5. Conclusion
In this work, the performance of a conventional single serpentine channel cold plate is improved by a double serpentine channel cold plate under the same operating conditions. The performance analysis of both designed cold plates is studied experimentally and numerically. The effect of flow rates, ambient temperatures, coolant temperatures, and discharge rates were investigated. The key findings are as follows:
i.
The 
 and 
 of a battery with a DSC cold plate is lower than an SSC cold plate. However, at a lower flow rate the 
 of a battery with an SSC cold plate is higher than the safe limits.
ii.
Under high coolant temperatures the 
of a battery with an SSC cold plate is above 35 °C, whereas the 
 of a battery with a DSC cold plate is 5.4 % lower under the same inlet temperature. The temperature uniformity is also improved with the DSC cold plate.
iii.
At higher ambient temperature the temperature of both the cold plates increased with the increase in ambient temperature. However, the 
 of a battery with an SSC cold plate is close to 5 °C under 30 °C ambient temperature.
iv.
The SSC cold plate has poor performance under higher discharge rates, whereas the DSC cold plate is within the safe temperature limits.
v.
The heat transfer rate of the DSC cold plate is improved by 14.9 % under 3C discharge at 120 mL/min flow rate.
vi.
The DSC cold plate can reduce the 
, 
 and power consumption by 6.4 %, 41 %, and 86.7 %, respectively, when compared with the SSC cold plate under the flow rate of 120 mL/min.