1. Introduction
Hydroprocessing units such as isomax in oil refineries upgrade hydrocarbon feedstocks by converting heavier feeds into more valuable lighter products. The reactions occur under a hydrogen-rich environment at moderately high temperatures and high pressure, in the presence of catalysts. Chemically stabilized austenitic stainless steels such as TP321 and TP347 are widely used for hydro-treater and hydro-cracker in complex refinery, because of their resistance to corrosion resistance and mechanical strength [1], [2], [3], [4].
In the present case, investigation has been undertaken after cracks are detected by UT inspection in reactor tube of isomax unit during an overhaul performed after about 210282 h of starting unit.
Reactor tube material is fabricated from AISI 347; this reactor tube with outer diameter 141.3 mm and wall thickness 18.37 mm operates in the maximum temperature and internal pressure of around 522 °C and 190 bar g, both of which are below the design temperature and pressure of 530 °C and 204 bar g respectively.
Probably the biggest cause of failure in pressure plant made of stainless steel is stress corrosion cracking (SCC) This type of corrosion forms deep cracks in the material and is caused by the combined effects of below conditions [4], [5], [6]:
(a)
specific environmental conditions with chloride, caustic, high-temperature water, polythonic acids, etc.,
(b)
susceptible material,
(c)
tensile stress.
Stress corrosion cracking by polythionic acids (PTASCC) was first identified with the introduction of hydrotreating units. The first incidence of this phenomenon was reported in 1943 in a fluid catalytic cracker. PTASCC is causes by Ingress of Polythionic acid into the sensitized austenite stainless steel. Polythionic acid is produced due to reaction of air (oxygen) and moisture with the sulfide scale to form polythionic acid [7], [8].
According to the refinery operator procedure, after shut down of the furnace for overhaul, first, steam is blown into the furnace tubes to eliminate any residuals. Then, for 7–8 h, steam was blown into the furnace and was vented to air. After that, alkaline washing is used for neutralization. Unfortunately this step just has controlled with duration time and for example, pH changes have not been monitored. Finally, purging with nitrogen or dry air is not performed and the internal surface of tubes is exposed to atmosphere.
During shutdown of hydrocracker unit polythionic acid formation occurred possibly due to errors in shutdown procedures [9].
Austenitic stainless steels and nickel-choromium-iron alloys that have become sensitized through thermal exposure are susceptible to PTASCC.
Sensitization is a deleterious phenomenon that occurs in austenitic stainless steel when it is submitted to an inappropriate increase in temperature such as what happens during welding or operating in the temperature range between 400 °C and 800 °C. This is a well-known phenomenon and consists of carbide precipitation at grain boundaries and chromium depletion in adjacent regions, making the material susceptible to intergranular corrosion [9]. For the AISI 347 the critical temperature is 550 °C that it is very close to design temperature of the reactor heater tubes SS347H [10].
The required tensile stresses can arise from a combination of applied and residual stresses; the later may be caused by weld fabrication or any cold work [11].
Given the above, the above mentioned tube removed and various investigations have been performed to determine the cause of cracks.
2. Experimental procedure
In order to determine whether cracks have reached the surface of the tube, dye penetrant test has been performed. According to the RT inspection results, 7 cm from the starting point of RT film, a 3 cm long branched crack has been observed. Therefore Metallographic samples prepared from this section. Samples preparation consisted of grinding down to 2400-grit paper, followed by 1/4 μm diamond polishing. According to ASTM A262 Practice E [12], electrolytic etching was performed in oxalic acid 10%.
Chemical analysis was performed on the cracked tube base material using an AWS PMI MASTER optical emission spectrometer. The interior surface of tube is covered with a black deposit. To indentify the presence of sulfur or sulfur based compounds, energy dispersive X-ray spectrographic (EDS) was used. Microstructures of the alloys were observed using optical and scanning electron microscopy. The corrosion deposit in the crack was analyzed using EDS micro-analysis in general accordance with ASTM E1508-98. Microhardness testing (by using Vickers method and 200-gram load accordance with ASTM E 10) was performed on the base metal, HAZ, weld and crack region.
3. Results
3.1. Dye penetrant inspection
As can be seen in Fig. 1, there are no evidence of cracks on the surface.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Reactor tube after dye penetrant test.

After cutting cracked region, the test sample area (Fig. 2) shows the cracks divided to sub branches, which propagated along the weld and the other along the tube direction that has started from the edge of the weld.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Propagation of branched crack in different weld direction.

3.2. Chemical analysis
Results are presented in Table 1. The tube was fabricated from a Type 347 and no unusual conditions were noted.
Table 1. Chemical composition of 347 stainless steel in wt.%.

Empty Cell	Element specimen
C	Mn	Si	Ni	Cr	Nb	Fe
Heater tube	0.052	1.65	0.47	11.7	20.1	0.62	Balance
ASTM TP 347 H	0.04–0.10 max	2.00 max	0.75 max	9.00–13.00	17.0–20.0	8 × C < Nb < 1.00	Balance
3.3. Microstructural features of the tube material
Fig. 3 shows austenitic microstructure of tube material is away from the weld zone. Chromium carbide precipitation occurs along the austenite grains. This causes depletion of chromium from the austenitic grains resulting in sensitization of material, which weakens the material’s ability to withstand certain corrosive environments decreasing the corrosion resistance. Fig. 3 does not show the ditch structure that is representative of a sensitized sample. In the region near the weld as shown in Fig. 4 carbides has precipitated along the grains boundary. Therefore in this region the metal sensitivity was more than the other region.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Austenitic microstructure of tube, away from weld zone.


Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Ditch structure of tube, near weld zone.

The crack cross section was prepared for analysis by using an optic microscope. The tip of the crack surface is shown in Fig. 5. The crack surface appears to be intergranular in nature.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. The tip of the crack surface.

Fig. 6 shows the propagation of crack in the tube. The crack propagated on base metal, HAZ and weld.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Propagation of crack in tube. (a) Initiation of crack on internal surface. (b) and (c) Propagation of crack in HAZ. (d) Crack propagation in weld.

3.4. Deposit analysis
Fig. 7 exhibits the EDS analysis results of deposits that were formed on the surface of the crack.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. EDS analysis results of the deposits.

Fig. 8 exhibits the EDS analysis results of the crack tip deposits. The results show presence of sulfur (S) in deposits. High percentage of sulfur indicates that the deposit predominantly consists of sulfur components.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. EDS analysis results of the crack tip deposits.

3.5. PWHT
To investigate effect of PWHT on microstructure of tube alloy, a sample was prepared from it. The sample was divided in two parts. One of them remained intact and another heated to 1065 °C and was kept at this temperature for 10 min. Then the temperature reduced to 899 °C. At this temperature, the sample remained for 1 h. Finally, the sample was transferred out of the furnace and air cooled. The microstructure of post weld heat treated sample and the intact one was shown in Fig. 9.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. The microstructure of post weld heat treated sample (a) and the intact one (b).

3.6. Hardness test
Hardness results are shown in Table 2. As seen, the differences between the hardness of base metal and other regions are significant (approximately 70 Vickers). Furthermore, it can be seen that after PWHT, the hardness of HAZ region has significant decrease.
Table 2. Microhardness testing results (HV).

Region	Base metal	HAZ	Weld	Crack tip
As Received	167	226	244	243
After PWHT	–	154	221	–
4. Discussion
According the results of analyzing the corrosion deposit, formation of sulfide scales on the inner surface of the reactor tube and in the crack tip were observed, they were formed during operation. During the overhaul, reactor was exposed to the atmosphere and humidity, sulfide scales react with oxygen and polythionic acid is produced. Also corrosion of grain boundary and presence of sulfur in crack tips that can result in formation of polythionic acid, were observed in EDS analysis.
PTA SCC is a type of intergranular SCC in nature. SCC by polythionic acid is distinguished from other types of SCC due to the intergranular mode of branched cracks propagation which can clearly be observed in Fig. 5.
Another factor of PTA SCC occurrence is tensile stress (residual and applied) that it is usually present in cold equipment and especially associated with weld fabrication [9].
High hardness in welding and heat affected zone (differences between the hardness of base metal and other regions were approximately 70 Vickers) shows that stress relief operation has not been done, that results in presence of residual stress in these areas. According to Fig. 6 the cracking that occurred in a type 347 stainless steel reactor tubes is near the weld and heat affected zone. These cracks are parallel and perpendicular to the weld, reflecting different stress levels in the region.
Metalugraphical examination indicated that the alloy of reactor tube was sensitized near the weld particularly on heat affected zone.
As it was shown in Fig. 4, due to carbide precipitations at grain boundaries, the observed microstructure of reactor tube alloy is similar to ditch structure and material susceptible to intergranular corrosion, which is another reason for PTA SCC.
Addition of stabilizing elements to alloy, such as titanium or niobium, or limiting the amount of carbon are two methods for reducing the effects of welding and heat treating on sensitization. However, they are not effective in long-term exposure to temperatures above 430 °C. The resistance of stainless steel to polythionic SCC can be significantly improved by a thermal stabilization. Fig. 9 shows the effect of thermal stabilization on microstructure. As can be seen, the microstructure of post weld heat treated sample has changed completely and there are no precipitated carbides in grain boundary. It is clear that, after welding procedure, suitable PWHT has not performed on the evaluated tube. Therefore, PWHT can be done after construction or repair weldings to reduce likelihood of PTA SCC occurrences during the overhaul.
5. Conclusion
Based upon the results presented earlier, the mode of failure was stress corrosion cracking by polythionic acids that arise from formation of sulfur components at the inner tube surface during operation, reaction of moist air on the inner tube surface during shutdown results in production of polythionic acids which along with the presence of internal stresses at the sensitized material, lead to the crack initiation and propagation parallel and perpendicular to the weld. Thus for prevention of polythionic acids cracking, compliance with the NACE Guidelines [13] for the protection of austenitic stainless steels during shutdown of refinery equipment is highly recommended. Also, if possible, thermal stabilization heat treatment is an effective way to remove carbide precipitations from grain boundary and improve alloy resistance to polythionic SCC.