Abstract
A high chromium (HiCr) iron work roll broke in three pieces in finishing stand 4 in a compact strip production (CSP) mill of a steel company. This roll breakage was examined by means of visual inspection, analysis of the mill process data, and chemical and microscopic analysis of a sample from the spheroidal graphite (SG) iron roll core. The roll broke due to inferior quality of the roll core. Due to strong contamination with chromium (1.5%), far above the limit for the CSP mill (max. 0.50%Cr), the core microstructure contained abundant millimeter-sized (Cr,Fe)-carbide clusters, leading to a poor impact toughness.
The quality criteria in the test report were adequate, and depending on the data the mill put the roll in service. Unfortunately, the supplied roll contained incorrect data with respect to the chromium level (0.5%Cr) and to a lesser extent the Mo levels in the roll core after solidification. If the test certificate had shown the actual core composition, would have been rejected and the roll failure would have been prevented.
The paper describes the causes of the roll failure manufactured from high chrome grade steel along with the precautionary measure.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
High chromium iron rollChromium carbidesConcave fracture
1. Introduction
In this article, the results of the failure analysis of HiCr Iron work roll in finishing stand F4 (top position) of a CSP mill have been presented. The thin strip mill produces strips of thickness in the range of 1.0–12.7 mm. The annual production of the mill is approximately 1.7 million tons. The schematic layout of the process flow of the mill is shown in Fig. 1. There are six finishing stands. The breakage caused a substantial disruption of the mill production. The roll broke during its very first campaign, just after tailing out of the second coil.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Schematic layout of the process.

2. Investigation method and result
2.1. Visual observation
The fracture surface of the roll, kept at the site shows that the roll fractured into three pieces as shown in Figs. 2a and b. Visual observation of the roll indicates that the fracture surfaces of the drive side and operator side pieces both have a convex shape. This is typical feature observed with broken HiCr iron and high speed steel work rolls. The breakage occurred close to the barrel center, slightly toward the operator side (Fig. 2a). In this case the failure has initiated at the core of the roll. No abnormality has been observed on the surface such as crack initiation. Since the crack has not been propagated along the bonding zone, it confirms proper bonding integrity at shell and core interface. Rather the failure has occurred due to the yielding of the roll core over a larger area [1]. Rapid fissure propagation has also been found radially from the interior to the surface confirming the origin of the crack from the core (Fig. 2b). The evidences of the roll failure attribute the breakage to insufficient toughness of the core. There can be two possibilities of such failure
1.
Excessive thermal and or mechanical load have occurred in the mill, inspite of the sufficient core strength.
2.
Insufficient core toughness, though the mill loads are normal.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. (a–c) Broken pieces of failed top working roll. (a) Etched microstructure of the shell and (b) etched microstructure of the core.

The process parameters like rolling force, bending force and torsion, were checked and no abnormalities were observed in the mill load [2]. Another notorious reason for the roll breakages could be a thermal breakage [3], if the temperature difference between the hot outer layer and the cold roll core become excessively high. This could occur by complete failure of the roll cooling system, or by reduced cooling efficiency e.g. due to an abnormally low system pressure during rolling or due to clogged nozzles. During the rolling of the coils as well as in the idle time between the coils, the roll cooling was operated at a constant pressure of 0.6 MPa (6 bar), sufficient for cooling as mill standard. Representative photos of the barrel surfaces of both work rolls revealed identical to normal temperature feature (Fig. 2a) of barrel surface.
2.2. Chemical composition
The analysis was performed by means of X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrometry for most elements and by a wet-chemical method for Magnesium, while the carbon and sulphur levels have been determined by means of a LECO instrument based on the combustion infrared detection technique.
Table 1 presents the chemical analyses in comparison with that of the result from the test certificate. Shells of spun cast HiCr iron work rolls generally contain very high level of chromium (typically about 16–18%) as a high fraction of chromium carbides is desired to achieve a good wear resistance. In contrast, the level of carbides should be kept low in the roll core in order to attain the required core toughness and tensile strength. The carbide forming element chromium is therefore not deliberately added to the core melt. As per standards, the chromium content of the core is significantly higher than desired and reported by supplier for the core of spheroidal graphite (SG) iron roll (which is less than 0.5%). Similar observation can be made on the molybdenum content of the core. The amount of chromium or any other carbide forming alloying element (such as molybdenum) in the core should be kept low so as to achieve high core toughness and strength. Presence of higher amount of alloying elements in the core must have resulted in precipitation of (Fe–Cr) carbide clusters in the core (see Table 2).
Table 1. Chemical analysis (wt.%).

Location	C	Mn	S	P	Si	Cr	Ni	Mo	Cu	Al	V	Mg
Shell	2.63	0.74	0.024	0.037	0.795	17.05	1.05	1.5	0.0237	0.004	0.116	–
Test certificate (shell)	2.77	0.75	0.025	0.048	0.81	17.38	0.98	1.6				
Core	2.54	0.476	0.006	0.085	3.27	1.298	0.564	0.188	0.049	0.026	TR	0.04
Test certificate (core)	3.37	0.39	0.010	0.09	3.16	0.08	0.53	0.050				
Table 2. Percentage phase analysis.

Phase	Matrix	Carbide
Area (%)	94.112	5.888
Max (%)	98.458	14.065
Min (%)	85.935	1.542
Mean % per field	94.112	5.888
Std. dev	2.505	2.505
95% CI	0.591	0.591
Rel. accuracy	0.628	10.040
Fields measured	70	70
The chemistry of the shell of HiCr iron roll is satisfactory. A higher chromium content is desired in the shell of the roll to obtain good wear resistance which is achieved by precipitation of chromium carbides.
2.3. Microstructural analysis
The etched microstructure of the shell reveals presence of chilled structure. In case of core, the microstructure is of graphite nodules, clusters of carbides in a pearlitic matrix.
2.3.1. Nodule count
Unetched microstructure of the core sample is shown in Fig. 3. Presence of graphite nodules can be observed in the microstructure. The morphology of graphite particles is not perfectly nodular. Graphite particles with an irregular rather than globular shape have been found. The majority of the graphite particles (90%) of Form VI (perfectly spheroidal or nodular) or Form V (slightly distorted spheroidal or nodular) as per ISO 945, which is acceptable [4] (see Fig. 4).

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Nodule shape and count.


Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Eutectic carbides in the microstructure.

2.3.2. Phase analysis of core
Image analysis of 70 fields, each having area 2.55 mm2 is performed to analyze the % carbide in the core of the roll. The average carbide fraction present in the core structure is 5.9%. In the roll making industry a maximum acceptable carbides level is 10%. However, this is valid for finely distributed carbides. But as shown in Fig. 2b big clusters of carbides are observed in the matrix and many clusters are as long as one millimeter. This carbide reduces the toughness and strength of the microstructure. For such extended carbides the area fraction enclosed by the envelope curves must be considered and which is much higher than 10%.
2.3.3. Mechanical property
The tensile strength of the core is found to be satisfactory. However impact property of the same is very poor (as shown in Table 3, Table 4).
Table 3. Hardness.

Sample	Hardness (BHN)	Equivalent shore hardness (ShoreC)
Shell	514, 534	70–71
Core	238	35
Table 4. Mechanical property:.

Sample	Tensile strength (MPa)	Elongation (%)	Impact at room temperature (J)
Core	238	35	9
3. Discussion
Visual observation of the roll indicates that both the fracture surfaces are convex in shape. The failure has initiated at the core of roll and propagated toward the outer surfaces of the roll. The interface between the HiCr shell and the SG iron core also shows no local defects. The chromium content of the core is significantly higher than desired for the core of SG iron roll. The molybdenum content is also marginally higher. The amount of chromium or any other carbide forming alloying element (such as molybdenum) in the core should be kept low so as to achieve high core toughness and strength. Presence of higher amount of alloying elements in the core must have resulted in precipitation of (Fe–Cr) carbide clusters in the core. The core is comprised of irregular rather than globular shape of graphite. The majority of the graphite is of Form V. The image analysis of the etched micro-sample of the core shows that the average carbide fraction present in the core structure is 5.9%. Even though the average carbide content is within acceptable limits, the distribution of carbides is extremely coarse resulting in lower toughness in the material. The presence of carbides should be in the form of finely dispersed particles. The roll failed in the first campaign during rolling of the second slab. At that time the roll was still at the new diameter and residual tensile stress was maximum in the core. Further high chromium% decreases the impact toughness and the thermal conductivity of the roll. Low thermal conductivity resulted in temperature gradient across the roll cross section. The above observations suggest that inferior core microstructure in combination with stress factor (thermal, residual and mechanical) caused the roll failure in the service.
4. Conclusion
The breakage of work roll is due to inferior quality of the roll core as result of manufacturing process. No abnormalities with respect to the mill process conditions have occurred prior to and during the roll failure. The chromium content in the core is far in excess of the limit defined for the mill (max 0.50%Cr). As a result, the microstructure contains abundant millimeter-sized carbide clusters, leading to a poor impact strength of the core.
The chromium found in the roll core is generally comes out during pouring of the core melt, as a part of the solidified shell is remelted. On the one hand, this is required to establish a strong shell–core bonding. On the other hand, a negative side effect is that alloying elements from the shell are entering the core. If this “wash-out” of alloying elements from the shell into to the core is too strong, the core is contaminated with too high concentrations of chromium.
5. Recommendation and preventive measure
After the investigation it has been decided that the new rolls will be used only after the in situ chemical testing of carbide forming elements with portable XRF machine. The analyses are being carried out on 8 positions around the circumference of neck to see the distribution of carbide forming elements. If the% of carbide forming element predominantly chromium is below 0.5% then the roll will be put into the service.
To control the Cr content in the core following measure has been taken at the manufacturer end:
1.
‘Steel’ interface design thickness has been increased from 25 to 30 mm to restricted Cr diffusion at core.
2.
Shell sleeve temperature has been reduced by 25–30 °C at the time of ‘Steel’ inter layer to control re-melting of sheet.
3.
Two times percentage inoculation in ladle for uniform carbide distribution.