Abstract
In mineral processing industries vibrating screens operate under high structural loading and continuous vibrations. In this regard, this may result in high strain rates, which may often lead to structural failure or damage to the screen. In order to lessen the possibility of failure occurring, theories and techniques for analyzing machine structures are investigated and applied to perform a sensitivity study of a newly developed vibrating screen. Structural strength and stability of a vibrating screen is essential to insure that failure doesn’t occur during production. In this paper a finite element analysis (FEA) on a reconfigurable vibrating screen (RVS) is carried out to determine whether the structure will perform as desired under extreme working conditions at the different configurations of 305 mm × 610 mm, 305 mm × 1220 mm and 610 mm × 1220 mm. This process is aimed at eliminating unplanned shutdowns and minimizes maintenance cost of the equipment. Each component of a screen structure is analyzed separately, stress and displacement parameters are determined based on dynamic analysis. In addition, a modal analysis was carried out for the first three (3) modes at frequency f of 18.756 Hz, 32.676 Hz and 39.619 Hz respectively. The results from the analysis showed weak points on the side plates of screen structure. Further improvements were incorporated to effectively optimize the RVS structure after undergoing an industrial investigation of similar machines.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Finite element analysisReconfigurabilityVibrating screen
1. Introduction
Ability to diminish the occurrence of a vibrating screen structural failure under various loading scenarios requires a great deal of attention during the analysis phase. Vibrating screen is known as mineral beneficiation equipment used in mineral processing industries mainly for separation of many precious export commodities. RVS is newly improved screening equipment aimed at increasing productivity while achieving high processing efficiency [1]. Generally in mining industries vibrating screen structures experiences continuous structural failures due to the extreme conditions they operate under. According to study conducted by Steyn [2], “due to the operating conditions of the vibrating screens, the stresses in the components need to be minimal in order to achieve an acceptable fatigue life” Hou et al. [3] further highlighted that in order to improve the efficiency of the screen the structural strength and the longevity of the vibrating screen should be analyzed. Design of machines is a challenging task if the dynamic loading acting on the screen structure is not fully recognized, which includes evaluation of stress distributions [4]. FEA is considered as the most essential and effective method of optimizing the mass and most importantly the structural strength of the screen. There are different types FEA which currently exists are: static analysis, modal analysis, harmonic analysis, transient dynamic analysis, spectrum analysis, buckling analysis and explicit dynamic analysis. For the scope of this paper dynamic analysis is used to predict the stresses acting on the screen structure, since it is able to calculate the effect of steady loading conditions on the screen structure, at the same time ignoring the inertia I and damping effects ζ caused by time varying loads. The next section of this article, presents the working principles of the proposed reconfigurable vibrating screen, related works on similar machines and the methodology used to carry-out the FEA simulations.
2. Industrial investigation
In this paper, a case study of company XYZ was used to investigate the failures associated with conventional vibrating screens. These machines are often used in this company for segregation of mineral concentrates acquired from runoff mine with that particular quarry. Unfortunately the machines suffered successive number of failures which resulted in high number of stoppages, resulting in huge economic losses. In addition to this, fluctuation in mineral concentrates demand forced the company to acquire new machines to supplement the existing machines in order to meet up with the demand, thus also influenced their annual operating cost negatively. To investigate this further, a heuristic approach was adopted and is discussed in the section of this paper.
2.1. Heuristic approach
Table 3 depicts the results of the failure modes of different components of vibrating screen used in company XYZ. A visual inspection approach was used to determine the percentage of failure (%) and the cumulative percentage of failures for each sub-components of the vibrating screen for a period of 6 years. The following formulae were used:
(1)
Where γ the cumulative percentages of failure for each component is, i is the cumulative frequency and n is the number of failure recorded over the period of 6 years. To analyse the failure mechanism of structures, it is generally essential to identify the operating condition under which the structure failed. The findings from the industrial investigation using heuristic approach showed that 19 screen panels failed on the machine which resulted in downtime. Overloading of material during screen was observed as one of the contributors to screen panel failure as shown in Fig. 1a–c. From these findings, the type of measures required to avert the above mentioned failures needs to be put in place. To familiarize with these measures, a literature review presented in the next section of this paper was conducted and mainly focused on the engineering tools required in solving failure and sensitivity studies using relevant case studies in this field.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Industrial investigation of vibrating screens failure.

Ultimate failure due to stress exceeding material strength, instability (buckling) due to load combination and time dependent failure modes such as cracks and wear were established as the major causes of failures in conventional vibrating screens.
There were numerous root causes of failures on vibrating screens that were identified during the industrial investigation as outlined in the fish bone diagram depicted in Fig. 2. The root causes were classified into four categories (people, product, process and equipment) that are known as contributors to the failures. Firstly with “people”, it was found that inadequate training and poor maintenance were contributors. The findings showed that mining industries practice run to failure instead of the recommended preventive maintenance. Secondly with “product”, it was observed that material clogging and overloading was the contributor towards failure screen panels. This often occurs due the weight of material exceeding the allowable strength that the screen panels were exposed. Thirdly with “equipment”, in this category misalignments and cracks of sub-components were observed to contribute also towards failure of screens. Fourthly with “process”, over using of machines beyond its normal recommended usage was noted as the contributor towards machine failures. In view of the lessons learnt from the conventional vibrating screens, there is a need to establish the optimal operating conditions that could be used by the RVS machine maintenance managers in preventing the premature failures of its subsystems, which seems to be inevitable in the mining industries (Table 1).
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (178KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Fish bone diagram of root causes of vibrating screens.

Table 1. Results of failure modes of different components of vibrating screen from industrial investigation.


3. Working principles of reconfigurable vibrating screens
The RVS design relates to a new improved vibrating screen for use in screening materials such as bulk granular and particulate materials. The RVS uses a simple theory of reconfigurability to increase its capacity therefore at the same time enhancing the productivity of the machine. Higher screening capacity is an important requirement which results into larger screening surface; hence, wider vibrating screens [5]. At its initial configuration of 305 mm × 610 mm, the RVS operates the same way as the conventional vibrating screen, however as the productivity of mineral particles increases, the screen is capable of being adjusted to the required capacity suitable for that particular production. As the machine is expanding, interconnected side plates, are designed in a modular fashion to carter for the extension allowing the transformation from 305 mm × 610 mm to 610 mm × 1220 mm configurations. Furthermore, the RVS machine consist of a torsion bar also known as structural beam in the middle of the screen which provides stability of the screen structure, minimize torsion and prevents failure of side plates. Li et al. [6] emphasized that the beam or torsion bar is the main member to keep the side panel of the screen stable. At its maximum configuration the screen exceeds the capabilities of a similar conventional screen with the same specifications. The RVS also known as the multi-functional processing machine addresses the three most important principles of Reconfigurable Manufacturing Systems (RMS) such as scalability, modularity and integrability. The schematic representation of a vibrating screen and its panels are depicted in Fig. 3.
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (321KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Schematic diagram of vibrating screen and its corresponding panels during material loading.

4. Literature review
In general vibrating screens consists of one or more screen decks depending on how finer the final product. The acceptable screen performance is mainly obtained by adjusting the angle of inclination, the feed rate, frequency and amplitude of the drive system. Many researchers have worked around the factors affecting the performance of the screens, but yet little has been done on increasing the capacity of the screen. Tsakalakis [7] investigated some of the factors affecting the performance of the screen which includes the intensity of vibration (amplitude and frequency) and observed that the screening efficiency is an exponential function of the screen length. It can be noted that increase in length of the screen enhances the screening efficiency. This led researchers into the development of a RVS which has ability to change its length to accommodate any changes in the required capacity. Moreover Ramatsetse et al. [1] indicated that the reconfigurable principle is still at its initial stage of implementation, there are still some components that need to be optimized for full realization of the concept. The RVS machine was further optimized by using FEA technique. The following Table 2 shows some of the previous research conducted to improve the performance and efficiency of vibrating screens.
Table 2. Summary of literature on screening performance.

Authors	Title	Aim	Method	Results
Tsakalakis et al. [7]	factors affecting screen performance in horizontal Vibrating screen Some basic	Factors affecting the screen performance such as Intensity of vibration and also investigate the percentage characteristic size fractions in the feed.	Experiments.	It is found that the screening efficiency is an exponential function of the screen length and can also be correlated to intensity of vibration.
Xiao-Mei et al. [8]	Dynamic and screening characteristics of vibrating screen with variable elliptical trace	Screening efficiency and processing capacity.	Mathematical model of vibrating screen.	Results show that the traces of the designed screen follows the ideal screening motion, therefore screening efficiency and processing capacity may be improved.
Yue-min et al. [9]	Dynamic Design Theory and Application of Large vibrating Screens	Performance of Vibrating screen with hyperstatic net-beam structure.	Finite element method (FEM) to a large screen with hyperstatic net-beam.	The results showed that the structure is able to avoid resonance effectively and reduce destructiveness.
Cleary et al. [10]	Separation performance of double deck banana screen	Separation Performance.	Discrete element method (DEM).	Models of the screen, its motion, and the shape of the particles can now be solved with more than 200000 particles in reasonable computation times.
NG et al. [11]	Dewatering performance of a vibrating screen	Investigate the moisture content of the processed mineral particles.	Experimental Linear Screen was constructed and tested with wet coal.	Results showed that the rate of dewatering depends on the instantaneous moisture content of the wet coal
Slepyan et al. [12]	Coupled mode parametric resonance in a vibrating screen model	To distinguish between conventional type screen and parametric resonance screen (PR) based on transverse oscillation.	Analytical and numerical simulation.	After comparing the conventional type screen with the parametric resonance (PR) mode, steady oscillations were found existing over certain frequency ranges.
Table 3. Typical modes of failure of vibrating screen structure.

Failure mode	Cause of failure	Symbol
Damaged screen frame	Overloading material on screen	
Damaged side plates	High level of vibration, wear and corrosion	
Damaged suspensions	Bottoming out	
Damaged screen mesh	Wear and inadequate fixing	
Related works reviewed in this article focused their efforts mainly on using tools such as DEM, FEM and FEA in solving industry problems. Based on the wide range of application of FEA in solving structural problems in vibrating screen machineries, this paper adopts this approach to analyse and optimize the structure of the newly developed RVS machine in order to avoid failure occurrence.
5. Vibrating screen failure analysis
The knowledge and expertise in preventing possible failures in vibrating screen is a good motivation in the design of RVS. In literature it has been anticipated that damage to shafts and other major components of a vibrating screen may often drive repairs, downtime and costs within the mining industry. To address this, Zhi-shan and Bao-liang, [12] highlighted that despite the development of Large Vibrating Screens, continuous deployment of fault detections, condition monitoring and other preventive maintenance strategies are fundamental to guarantee its safety, reliability and serviceability during operation. The safer approach to prevent equipment failure is to make use of finite element methods in the early stage of the design to minimize the introduction of costly preventive and condition monitoring techniques. There are numerous number of failure experience by vibrating screen during production. According to the study conducted by Ramatsetse et al. [1] described the three type of failures commonly found in vibrating screen structures as shown in Table 3.
In order to prevent some of the failures, there is a great need to conduct a finite element analysis of each component of the screen to verify if the structure will withstand the prescribed loads.
6. Finite element analysis
Structural failure due to impact of material on the screen structure must be minimized for better screen performance and extended screen life. Thus predicting of the stresses before the actual application is essential for the overall analysis. According to Mular et al. [13], FEA is a latest design technique used to analyze operating stresses distributions in screen components and screen structures under vibration and material loading. In addition, FEA could be used as a tool to fine tune vibrating screen designs by altering the stiffness of the screen structure, in order to minimize the modal frequency of the screen. Yue-min et al. [9] simulated a new vibrating screen with hyperstatic net-beam structure using finite element method (FEM). By optimizing the structural stiffeners on the side plates, the structural strength was increased and the natural frequency of bending deformation was enhanced. Nianquin et al. [14] studied the stress distribution of ultra-heavy vibrating screen under static loading using finite element analysis software ANSYS®. The results from the study showed weakness in the structure; therefore further improvements were incorporated to strengthen the structure at the same time extending the life of screening machine. Similarly Chen-yu et al. [15] studied the selection of working frequency of large vibrating screen using ANSYS® and were able to generate a theoretical guidance for selecting an acceptable working frequency. Li et al. [6] conducted a study on analyzing the modal and harmonic response of the beam structure using ANSYS® software, through the analysis the stress state, the fatigue life and reliability of the linear vibrating screen was improved. Mean while Yantek et al. [16] conducted a study on estimating sound power level reduction by adding rib stiffeners on weak points of the screen structure using finite element analysis method. The results from the study showed that adding stiffeners have a little impact on sound power level, but instead enhances the structural stability of the machine. Wolny et al. [4] used finite element analysis method to obtain the state of stress distribution generated on the screen separator, distinguished from the rest of the studies, since strain gauges installed on the screen were used to verify the stress from the numerical analysis. As indicated earlier finite element analysis consist of various types of analysis, but for the scope of this work the author only concentrate dynamic and modal analysis.
6.1. Dynamic analysis
There are four types of loading that can be applied in dynamic analysis which include;
•
Harmonic loads
•
Transient loads
•
Periodic loads
•
Random loads
Harmonic loads relates to the vibration isolation of the vibrating screen, transient loads may arise subjected to impact and impulse, while the periodic loads and random loads often used to describe wave motions which occur at random intervals. For any type of vibrating screen to perform its functions, there is always a vibration motion that occurs during its operation. From the knowledge of vibration machines, it can be easily affirmed that the frequency of vibration of any vibrating equipment must not equal the natural frequency of the systems. According to Nianquin [14], when the resonance occurs, theoretically the amplitude is infinite; therefore it could lead to the damage of the screen structure or even cause high noise levels.
7. Finite element analysis of reconfigurable vibrating screen
Finite element analysis is very essential in analyzing the structure of the screen, in order to determine failures caused due to uncertainty of loads applied. Like any other vibrating screens, the RVS is composed of many different components with different functions, however due to the complexity of the structure and too many components; it is very difficult to generate a finite model of the structure using normal Computer Aided Design (CAD) software Chuanguang et al. [17]. In this study a separate components screen structure is analyzed separately. Other small pieces including connecting bolts are ignored in the analysis, since they have little effect on the overall screen structure Yin et al. [18]; Xinyong et al. [19].
8. Methodology
Fig. 4 below shows the procedure followed to conduct the finite element analysis of a reconfigurable vibrating screen.
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (128KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Basic steps of finite element analysis.

8.1. Boundary conditions
Adding boundary conditions is the first step taken to analyze a design for stress distributions. Hence in order to obtain accurate results, it is vital to apply the boundary conditions to the screen structure [14]. Fixtures are applied to the screen structure to prevent it from moving when forces and pressure are applied.
8.2. Applying loading
In this section, dynamic loading are described and applied to the screen structure; however the ANSYS® software assumes that the loading applied to the excitation of the screen structure harmonic behavior. Appling forces on the cylindrical surface such as the torsion bar proved to be more challenging since the forces are automatically converted to compressive loading instead of bending. Therefore it is necessary to create a flat surface on one plane of the cylindrical bar to solve the problem. The point loads marked in “red” on the screen structure represents the bolts and nuts used to secure the components of the screen together. While the vibrating motors are represented by point masses as shown in Fig. 5a–c. This approach simplifies the complexity involved when these components are embedded in the CAD model of the RVS machine structure.
Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (564KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Applying of loading conditions on the RVS machine structure.

To be specific, the bed depth which represents the height of the distributed mineral particles along the screen length was multiplied by the length and breadth for each configuration in order to attain the volume of the product. Furthermore, the loads were estimated based on the various bulk densities of the specified mineral particle samples, which were then converted into uniformly distributed load (UDL), combined with the mass of the polyurethane screen panels.
8.3. Applying material
FEA always requires that a material is specified for each designed component. The material selection needs to align to the type of functions that the machine will perform during its operation. For components such as vibrating motor, screen panels and bolts, material specifications are already known, as such components are commercially available. However for the main screen structure was specified with mild steel with a density ρ of 7.85g/m3, modulus of elasticity E of 210 GPa and a Poisson’s ratio μ of 0.303.
8.4. Meshing and Simulation
In order to minimize the time taken to run the simulation, the extra features that are not relevant to the analysis were removed. During this process finite element analysis uses mesh prior to generating results as shown in Fig. 6a–c for analyzing the reconfigurable screen structure, the mesh size is always kept at 100% since the finer the mesh size, the more accurate results to be obtained. The accuracy of the finite element analysis is dependent upon mesh refinement and boundary conditions of the simulation [20].
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (868KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Mesh generation on the RVS machine structure.

According to Song et al., [21], dynamic sensitivity analysis of the mechanical structure is the rate of change of the structural modal parameters on the design variables. The sensitivity analysis in this paper was achieved by keeping bed depth, length and breadth of the screen constant while changing the loads applied on the screen structure, which corresponds to the bulk densities of varying mineral particles to be screened on the RVS machine FEA model at 305 mm × 610 mm, 305 mm × 1220 mm and 610 mm × 1220 mm RVS machine configurations. The bulk density of granite, coal, iron ore, gold ore and limestone were quantified as; 1554 kg/m3, 960 kg/m3, 2595 kg/m3, 1740 kg/m3, 945 kg/m3 respectively while the estimated undersize mineral particles was assumed as 30%. In order to create vibration of the RVS machine, a harmonic drive loads configured at a frequency of 25 Hz was created on the RVS machine model at machine configurations of 305 mm × 610 mm, 305 mm × 1220 mm and 610 mm × 1220 mm. Table 4, Table 5 below summarizes the sensitivity results and modal analysis of the RVS machine in responding to aforementioned loads at different machine configurations. It can seen from these results, that the sensitivity index of the RVS machine at 305 mm × 610 mm and 305 mm × 1220 mm configurations showed that side plate assembly was the most sensitive sub-component, while for RVS machine configuration 610 mm × 1220 mm showed that drive beam assembly is mostly likely to obtain premature failure. Furthermore, by considering the torsional vibration of the body and its suspension points around the center of the RVS machine structure in x, y and z directions, the first three (3) modes are derived at an operating frequency f of 18.756 Hz, 32.676 Hz and 39.619 Hz as shown in Table 5.
Table 4. The sensitivity changes due to load variation.

Material	Component	Density 
Modulus of Elasticity
Poisson’s ratio μ
Structural steel (Mild)	Screen structure	7.85	210	0.303
Table 5. The sensitivity and modal changes due to load variation.

Configuration	Percentage (%) feed	Sensitivity index	Number of screen panel modules
1st Configuration	Drive beam assembly		***	
	Side plate assembly	****
Suspension brackets	*
Back plate assembly	**
No stringer	
2nd Configuration	Drive beam assembly		***	
	Side plate assembly	****
Suspension brackets	*
Back plate assembly	**
No stringer	
3rd Configuration	Drive beam assembly		****	
	Side plate assembly	**
Suspension brackets	*
Back plate assembly	***
Stringer	***
Modal analysis		Natural frequency (Hz)		Vibration mode
	1st Order Mode	18.756 Hz		Torsional vibration of the body and suspension around the center of the screen structure (Y)
	2nd Order Mode	32.676 Hz		Torsional vibration of the body and suspension around the center of the screen structure (X)
	3rd Order Mode	39.619 Hz		Torsional vibration of the body and suspension around the center of the screen structure (Z)
9. Results
Based on the results of ANSYS®, the von Mises stresses and deformations of the RVS machine are presented in Fig. 7a–c respectively. These results are simulations performed for three different configurations under different material loadings. The following section discussed these results extensively. For the 1st RVS machine configuration, the maximum stress of 16 MPa was experienced by the back plate assembly, followed by the stringer with the maximum stress of 15 MPa when the machine is loaded with granite as shown in Fig. 8a. In view of this, appropriate optimization techniques were adopted to minimize the stress focus on these sub-components of the machine by introducing stiffeners and solid edges.
Fig. 7
Download: Download high-res image (461KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Finite element analysis of a RVS machine structure.

Fig. 8
Download: Download high-res image (645KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. (a) Finite element analysis results of a reconfigurable vibrating screen at the 1st Configuration. (b) Finite element analysis results of the RVS machine at the 2nd Configuration. (c) Finite element analysis results of the RVS machine at the 3rd Configuration.

On the other hand, for the 2nd RVS machine configuration, the maximum stress of 24 MPa was experienced by the side plate assembly when iron ore is loaded, in addition the same side plate assembly showed maximum stress of 21.7 MPa when the machine is loaded with gold ore as shown in Fig. 8b.
Lastly, for the 3rd RVS machine configuration, the maximum stress of 22 MPa was experienced by the drive beam assembly when iron ore is loaded, moreover the drive beam assembly again showed maximum stress of 21.8 MPa when the same material is used as shown in Fig. 8c.
10. Discussion and implications of the results
Test of major components of RVS predicted stresses of critical joints and showed that respective weld points are able to withstand any extreme forces exerted on them. After modeling the entire design, it revealed adequate results similar to those calculated. The model was refined so that each piece may be examined to identify possible areas for redesigning. Overall results from the FEA showed that the structure of the RVS would experience structural failure on centroids of the side plates, and therefore stiffeners were incorporated to minimize the deformation on the side plates. After the introduction of stiffeners the result showed that the screen structure is able to withstand structural failure effectively.
The variations in these results is due to the fact that side plates are responsible for holding the screen decks and vibrating motor, thus operate are under remarkable strain at all times since they are throwing the combined weight of the screen and the mineral particle products in an elliptical motion during screening. The RVS machine operates at maximum speed of 750 rpm and all this energy is transmitted via the torsion bar and the stress is eventually transmitted the side plates resulting in stress cracks. Furthermore, evidence shows that this happens because the suspension mechanism are not often cleaned which result in less absorption of the screens transmitted energy. Findings implied that the resonances between the lower frequency modes and the harmonics of running speed resulted in high stress levels in the structure and not the steady loads that were produced during screening of the mineral particle products. Thus, excessive mechanical stresses in the vibrating screen structure caused the various red regions to develop further overtime. As highlighted earlier in this paper, the common sources of failure of engineering components can be attributed to: design deficiencies, poor selection of material, manufacturing defects, exceeding design limits and overloading and inadequate maintenance [22].
After a critical analysis of the RVS machine subsystems, it was necessary to make improvements on the structure in order to avert failure occurrence. The following are some of the modifications implemented prior to the machine development and fabrication as shown Fig. 9a and b.
•
The suspension bracket was modified from using three structural ribs to a single rib positioned in the middle of the suspension plate
•
The beam plate, which experienced high stress during the FEA analysis, was modified by bending the top section at angle for more rigidity and stability
•
The machine height was also reduced significantly to allow a shift in centre of gravity
•
The beam plate was modified from being a single independent plate to being part of the beam structural unit.
Fig. 9
Download: Download high-res image (385KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Potential improvements on the RVS machine subsystems.

Regardless of the side plates showing the highest stress concentrations compared to other RVS machine subsystems, the drive beam assembly is still considered the core of the RVS machine systems, due to the fact that it holds the rest of the structure in a stable position and holds the drive excitation motors which ensure efficient movement of particles across the surface of the screen. The high level of stress concentrations on the RVS machine emphasizes the need for ongoing structural improvements and optimization to address failure occurrence. The need for such structural improvements is closely associated with the type of loads imposed to that particular area of interest as well as the application there of. In view of this, experiments are essential to validate the accuracy of the results as well as the reliability of the method used in the study. The results imply that stress concentration may arise on the interfaces of the side plates and may further spread to other area of the RVS machine structure if used continuously during screening. Thus, interventions are required to avert these issues from occurring.
11. Conclusions and recommendations
With the increasing development of mining machineries, vibrating screens are widely used in separating mineral particles into suitable sizes. Thus, the effective operation of these machines cannot be neglected. In this paper, failure analysis was conducted in order to avert frequent failures on vibrating screens, extend component fatigue life, as well as ascertain inspection intervals. Based on the outcome of the failure analysis, optimal operating conditions for the RVS were established. In addition, a FEA model of the RVS was generated at 305 mm × 610 mm, 305 mm × 1220 mm and 610 mm × 1220 mm configurations, and the results of this analysis as well as the sensitivity index affirmed that weak points on the RVS machine structure were experienced mainly on side plate’s assemblies. The 3 order modal shapes were also obtained by modal analysis. Acknowledgments In this study, the 1 st mode of vibration was one of the key concerns, since it depicted the largest contribution to the structure's motion. Thus recommendation could be made to vibrating screen managers to run the machine at its optimal operating conditions. Moreover, addition of extra stiffeners to the side plates of the screen structure could be another recommendation towards averting premature or frequent failure experienced on vibrating screens. In that regard it’s also necessary to confirm practically and experimentally that which of the RVS machine sub-systems will maintain its strength even when linked to other components of the screen. FEA needs to be used when the screen is under dynamic loading, this will allow a better analysis of the stresses similar to that of real-time industry operating conditions.