1. Introduction
In order to meet the technical requirements of complex structural wells such as horizontal wells, extended reach wells and multi-branch wells for offshore oil and gas development in the South China Sea [[1], [2]], Yangtze University and China Offshore Oil Research Center jointly developed the wellbore trajectory control tool with high build-up rate [[3], [4], [5]], which belongs to directional rotary steering drilling tool. Due to the small friction and torque in drilling, the directional rotary steering drilling tool can drill out a smoother hole, which can use larger drilling pressure and higher drilling speed, full using the performance of the bit andless lateral load make the directional rotary steering drilling tool gradually get attention and development [[6], [7], [8]].
The researches on rotary steering drilling tool mainly focus on the prediction of borehole trajectory [[9], [10]], tool deviation ability [11], tool vibration prevention [12] and tool application [[13], [14]], there has been few researches on parts failure of rotary steering drilling tool. Bearing failure is a common failure of drilling tools[15], and bearing failure studies are generally only for a single bearing. Mechanical, abrasive, adhesive and tribochemical wear are four different major mechanisms that interact with each other, many researchers have described the relevant mechanism of those actions [[16], [17], [18]]. The contact analysis of roller needle and raceway by “classical slice method” is one of the methods to study bearing failure, P·K Gupta [[19], [20]] applied “classical slice method” to solve the contact problem between rolling body and raceway, and established a dynamic analysis model of rolling bearing to analyze the dynamic characteristics of rolling bearing. Based on the analysis of the relative sliding and the average pressure of the contact zone between the needle roller and the raceway at different contact positions, the formula for calculating the friction moment of the thrust needle roller bearing is derived by Hatazawa T [[21], [22]]. Besides, there are many studies on bearing failure [[23], [24], [25], [26], [27], [28], [29]], but few studies have combined bearing and tool to study bearing failure.
Consequently in this paper, considering the stiffness of the shell, a mechanical model of the main shaft is presentedto analyze the counterforce of the bearings and thebuild-up rate of the tool. Then, the failure reason of cantilever bearing is analyzed by establishing a FE Model which includes cantilever bearing, centering bearing and the main shaft. The theoretical model and the FE model are verified by experiments.
2. Working principle of wellbore trajectory control tool
The sketch of the principle of wellbore trajectory control tool with a high build-up rate is shown in Fig. 1. The front end of the main shaft is equipped with a cantilever bearing, the lower end is equipped with a self-aligning bearing, and the center is equipped with eccentric mechanism. In order to achieve the build-up rate, the eccentric mechanism rotates to make the main shaft have different degrees of bending, and the axis of main shaft deviates from the original direction, so the bit can reach the deflection angle [3].
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (66KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of wellbore trajectory control tool in highly deviated wells.

The structure of mechanical power offset device is shown in Fig. 2. It is mainly composed of two electromagnetic clutches, two reduction gears, an eccentric mechanism and others. The eccentric mechanism consists of two eccentric rings, and the main shaft power is transmitted to the electromagnetic clutch through the couplings. When the electromagnetic clutch is electrified, it meshes with the deceleration device, and the power is transmitted to the eccentric mechanism after the deceleration, thus realizing the rotation of the inner and outer eccentric rings [5].
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (143KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. The structure of mechanical power offset device.

3. Failure condition
In order to test the performance of the wellbore trajectory control tool, our team developed several experiments on the dynamic performance test bench of downhole tools, as shown in Fig. 3. The cantilever bearing of borehole trajectory control devices failure twice during the experiments, as shown in Fig. 4. After disassembling the faulty bearing, we found that both the rolling body and the cage of the bearing were damaged. It can be seen that the cages are badly worn and deformed, and it has a certain degree of fracture, at the same time, there are obvious deformation caused by extrusion damage at one end of the cage. The other end of the cage has no obvious wear marks, and the wear and extrusion condition are obviously better than the first end. There are large number of needle rollers and metal crumbs on the inner and outer surfaces of the bearing, the needle is seriously detachedand is partly fractured with needle rollers.In order to find out the cause of bearing failure, the followingresearchesare carried out.
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (147KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Tool performance test.

Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (132KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Bearing failure.

4. Analysis of mechanical behavior
4.1. Basic assumption
Since the bearing force is closely related to the main shaft, the mechanical analysis of the bearing must be combined with the stress of main shaft.The main shaft of wellbore trajectory control tool is subjected to torque, drilling pressure and rotational speed while at a stable build-up rate. Before mechanical analysis, the following assumptions need to made to simplify the calculation:1)The effect of drilling fluid on the main shaft is not considered. 2) The bearing is rigid support,ignoringthe deformation. 3) The cantilever bearing has no axial movement or rotation, so it is simplified as a moving pair. 4) The self-aligning bearing is simplified as a hinge constraint and the eccentric ring is equivalent to a displacement load. 5) Ignoring the interaction between bit and formation, and the effects of drilling pressure and torque are not considered.
4.2. Mechanism of eccentric ring
Taking the wellbore center at the cross section of the eccentric ring as the coordinate origin, the coordinate system is shown in Fig. 5. The thick edge of the outer eccentric ring Oout as the starting end, and the displacement vector formed at the end of the wellbore center O point is e1.The thick edge of inner eccentricity ring Oin is the beginning end, the center point of outer eccentricity ring as the end displacement vector is e2, and the inner and outer eccentricity ring composite displacement vector is. When e1 is consistent with the negative direction of x axis, e2 is in the same direction as the x axis, the main shaft axis is coaxial with the shell and the tool is in unbiased state, taken that internal and external ring state as the initial state. The vector of the internal and external eccentricity ring can be expressed as.
(1)
(2)
where α1 is the angle between e1 and the x axis, α2 is the angle between e2 and the x axis, θ is the angle between e and the x axis, e1, e2, eis the value of vector e1, e2, e, ex is the value of the e projected onto the x axis, ey is the value of the e projected onto the y axis.
Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (130KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. The coordinate system of eccentric strap.

According to the geometric relations, we can know that.
(3)
(4)
4.3. Mechanical model and analysis of the main shaft considering shell stiffness
As shown in Fig. 6, the main shaft is bent under the action of the offset mechanism, the main shaft is subjected to the force P of the eccentric mechanism. At the same time, the main shaft gives a counterforce P′ to the shell through the eccentric ring, assuming the deflection angle of the shell is θ2. Therefore, the deflection curve of the main shaft, rotation angle of the bit and offset forceareall related to the stiffness of the main shaft, the stiffness of the shell and others.
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (62KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Mechanical model of the main shaft while considering shell stiffness.

According to the geometric relations, we can know that.
(5)
where ω1 is the deformation of the main shaft at the eccentric mechanism, ω2 is the deformation of the outer shell at the eccentric mechanism. e is the offset distance of eccentricity ring.
The relationship between the deformation and deflection angle of the main shaft and shell can be obtained from structural mechanics.
The deflection equation of the main shaft w1 is shown as follow:
(6)
where L is the distance between the cantilever bearing and the self-aligning bearing, m; L1 is the distance between the eccentric ring and the self-aligning bearing, m; L2 is the distance between the eccentric ring and the cantilever bearing, m; P is the load applied by eccentric mechanism, N; E1 is the elastic modulus of the main shaft, Pa; I1 is the moment of inertia of the main shaft section, m4.
The rotation angle of the main shaft θ1 is shown as follow:
(7)
The deflection equation of the shell w2 is shown as follow:
(8)
where E2 is the elastic modulus of the shell, Pa; I2 is the moment of inertia of the shell section, m4. P′ is the force of the eccentric mechanism to the shell, N.
The rotation angle of the main shaft θ2 is shown as follow:
(9)
According to the transfer and interaction mechanism of force, we can know that P′ = P, the deflection at B and C can be calculated by the upper formula:
(10)
(11)
The formula (5) for calculating the offset force exerted by eccentric mechanism can be obtained by substituting (10) and (11).
(12)
4.4. The force model of cantilever bearing
As the deformation of the main shaft is small, and the cantilever bearing force analysis is under small deformation, we could assumed that.
(13)
(14)
where M(x) is the bending moment of the main shaft, I1 can be calculated as.
(15)
where D1 is the outer diameter of main shaft, m; d1 is the inner diameter of main shaft, m.
Under static offset condition, the boundary condition of main shaft are assumed to be.
(16)
The counterforce equation of self-aligning bearing can be obtained:
(17)
The counterforce equation of cantilever bearing can be obtained:
(18)
The moment force equation of cantilever bearing can be obtained:
(19)
By establishing mathematical and mechanical model equations for the main shaft, the magnitude and direction of the offset force P can be determined under the static offset state, and the radial force and the bending moment of cantilever bearing under the constant force state can be deduced.
4.5. Influence of structural parameters on radial force of cantilever bearing
In order to reduce radial force of cantilever bearing, analyzing the influence of the structural parameters of main shaft on the offset force which is required of the eccentric ring, and the counterforce of cantilever bearing and self-aligning bearing is based on the mathematical and mechanical model. Since the build-up rate should meet the tool's high build-up rate, the eccentricity is set to 6 mm and the deflection angle θ at the lower end of the main shaft (x = 0)should be bigger than the [30],In the factor analysis, the influence factor change and other parameter values are refer to Table 1.
Table 1. Main parameters related to the tool.

Parameters name	Numerical value
The outer diameter of main shaft, D1	70 mm
The inner diameter of main shaft, d1	40 mm
The outer diameter of shell, D2	180 mm
The outer diameter of shell, d2	150 mm
The elastic modulus of the main shaft, E1	195GPa
The elastic modulus of the shell, E2	211Gpa
The distance between the eccentric ring and the self-aligning bearing, L1	590 mm
The distance between the eccentric ring and the cantilever bearing, L2	1795 mm
The offset distance of the eccentric mechanism, e	0–6 mm
4.5.1. Influence of stiffness and inner diameter of shell
The relationships between the target parameters (θ,P,R1,R2)and the shell stiffness, the target parameters and the inner diameter of shell, as shown in Fig. 7, Fig. 8 respectively. From the results we can know that the deflection angle θ at the lower end of the main shaft (x = 0)， offset force P required by eccentric ring, the counterforce R1 of self-aligning bearing and the counterforce R2 of cantilever bearing are all increased with the increase of the stiffness of the shell, but the increase amplitude is smaller. Those target parameters decrease with the increase of the inner diameter of the shell, the decrease amplitude is also very small. The above analysis shows that the stiffness and inner diameter of the shell have little effect on the target parameters.
Fig. 7
Download: Download high-res image (198KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. The relationship between the target parameters and the shell stiffness.

Fig. 8
Download: Download high-res image (208KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. The relationship between the target parameters and the inner diameter of shell.

4.5.2. Influence of different distance between bearings and eccentric ring
While changing the distance between the eccentric ring and the self-aligning bearing L1 and distance between the eccentric ring and the cantilever bearingL2, the relationship between the target parameters and L1 and L2is shown in Fig. 9, Fig. 10 respectively. The target parameters areall decreased with the increase of the distance L1 and L2, deflection angle satisfies the minimum angle of the tool within the range of L2's changes in our analysis, but L1 should not less than 0.64 m since the deflection angle θ must be bigger than theθmin.
Fig. 9
Download: Download high-res image (251KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. The relationship between the target parameters and L1.

Fig. 10
Download: Download high-res image (255KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 10. The relationship between the target parameters and L2.

While the distance between the cantilever bearing and the self-aligning bearing L = 2.385 m is invariant, changing the distance between the eccentric ring and the self-aligning bearing L1, the relationship between the target parameters and L1/L is shown in Fig. 11. Except that the counterforce R2 decreases with the increase of L1/L, othertarget parameters are reduced first and then increasedwith the increase of L1/L. In order to meet the requirement of theθmin, the L1/L should be less than 0.24 or bigger than 0.76.
Fig. 11
Download: Download high-res image (109KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 11. The relationship between the target parameters and L1/L.

5. Establishment and loading of finite element model for cantilever bearing
5.1. Model establishment
In order to analyze the failure reasons of cantilever bearings, a FE model of the bearing is established to simulate the bearing which is based on the theoretical calculation of the cantilever bearing load. Due to the limited internal space of the tool, the cantilever bearing on the main shaft is a needle roller bearing without inner ring holder. The outer diameter of the cantilever bearing is 90 mm, the inner diameter is 70 mm and the width is 23 mm.The basic rated dynamic loads are 62.7kN, static loads are 113 kN. They have 37 needle rollers with a diameter of 3 mm and a length of 20 mm. The full scale model of cantilever bearing, main shaft and aligning bearing are established by using SolidWorks software, the bit is simplified, the cantilever bearing and the overall analysis model are shown in Fig. 12.
Fig. 12
Download: Download high-res image (107KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 12. Analysis model.

5.2. Constraint and loading
According to the working condition of the tool, the outer surface of the bearing and left side of the main shaft are completely constrained, the bit along the axis of the main shaft is also constrained. The interface between the eccentric ring and the main shaft is set, and the effect of eccentric device is simulated by adding displacement constraint to that interface. The contact between the bearing and the main shaft is a frictional contact pair, and the coefficient of friction is 0.08. The rotation speed of the main shaft, the drilling pressure and other boundary conditions are loaded according to different analysis conditions.
5.3. Grid independence analysis
Considering the effects of mesh quality, especially the contact between needle roller and cage, the influence of different mesh sizes on the maximum stress of cage and needle roller were analyzed with the fillet radius is 0.5 mm, the results under different grids are shown in Fig. 13, and the calculated errors under different grids on the basis of minimum grid stress are shown in Table 2. Considering the calculation time and error value, the element size of cage is selected to 0.5 mm, the element size of needle is selected to 0.3 mm in subsequent analysis,
Fig. 13
Download: Download high-res image (89KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 13. The maximum stress of cage and needle roller under different element size.

Table 2. Relative error of the maximum stress.

Element size of cage	2.0 mm	1.0 mm	0.8 mm	0.5 mm	0.3 mm
Error of needle roller (%)	−23.663	−6.979	−2.183	−0.202	0
Error of cage (%)	−41.224	−21.251	−12.9018	−2.153	0
Element size of cage	1.0 mm	0.8 mm	0.5 mm	0.3 mm	0.2 mm
Error of needle roller (%)	−12.156	−5.853	−1.969	−0.505	0
Error of cage (%)	−33.029	−22.950	−13.318	−2.801	0
6. Experiments and result analysis
6.1. Experimental verification
In order to verify the theoretical and FE results, the laboratory simulation experiments are carried out on the dynamic performance test bench of downhole tools (as shown in Fig. 3), the specific parameters areTable 1.
Since the experiments are based on existing sensors of the tool, the verification should depend on the deflection angle of the drill bit, which is considered to the deflection angle of the lower end of the main shaft (x = 0) [30]. Taking maximum offset distance of the eccentric mechanism as the value of 6 mm and other parameters into the above equation, it can be obtained that the offset force P= 12,409 N, the deflection angle of the lower end of the main shaft is 0.690°(x = 0), and the supporting reaction force of the self-aligning bearing is R1= 7899 N. The experimental results show that the tool deflection angle is 0.6389° [31], which is very close to the theoretical results. In order to further analyze the correctness of the results, the deflection angles of drill bits at different offset distance are compared as shown in Fig. 14. From the results we can know that the error between the results of theory, FE and experimental is small. The reliability of theoretical analysis and FE analysis are illustrated by experiments. The value of FE results is less than experimental and theoretical values, since the finite element model is simplified, the influence of shell and other factors is not considered, therefore, it is necessary to consider the stiffness of the shell in the theoretical model.
Fig. 14
Download: Download high-res image (129KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 14. Comparing to the theoretical,FE and experimental results.

6.2. Results and discussion
6.2.1. Cantilever bearing failure analysis
The maximum total deformation and stress of needle roller and cage are obtained by simulating the same size of the original invalid bearing by FE model, fillet radius of needle roller is set to 0.25 mm. As shown in Fig. 15, Fig. 16, the maximum von Mises stress is at one end of the needle, almost the same as the actual failure figure of the needle roller. Stress concentration occurs at the edge of cage, which is also consistent with the failure position of the cage. From the results we can know the maximum Mises stress of the needle is 1332 MPa, which isalmost equal to the ultimate contact stress [p] = 1500MPa. The maximum Mises stress of the cage is 292.46 MPa, which is less than yield stress of cage material σb = 325 MPa.
Fig. 15
Download: Download high-res image (239KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 15. The deformation and Mises stress of the cage.

Fig. 16
Download: Download high-res image (262KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 16. The deformation and Mises stress of the cage.

According to the deformation diagram of the needle roller, the maximum inclination angle of the needle roller is produced:
(20)
where is the maximum inclination angle of the needle roller,°; γmax, the maximum deformation at one end of needle roller, m; γmin, the minimum deformation at the other end of needle roller, m.
It can be obtained β = 0.0524°. According to the relative fatigue life of the roller bearing at different inclined angles [[32], [33]], if the fatigue life of the bearing without inclined angle is set to 1, the relative fatigue life of needle roller bearings is only 0.02 whileβ = 0.05°.
From the above analysis we can know the wear of the right end of the needle roller is obviously larger than the left side, which is consistent with the actual failure form of roller needle and the theoretical mechanical law.The needle and cage edge produce a stress concentration, that gradually wear the roller needle and cage. The inclined angle seriously affects the use of needle roller bearings and accelerates the failure of the needle and cage, which eventually leads to the failure of the cantilever bearing.
6.2.2. Influence of fillet radius on needle roller
Another problem with the failure needle roller is that there is no fillet or the fillet radiusare too smallon the both ends of needle, the initial fillet of needle roller is shown in Fig. 17. Based on the FE model, the failure of the cantilever bearing with different fillet radius (r = 0 mm, 0.25 mm, 0.5 mm, 0.75 mm, 1 mm, 1.25 mm, 1.5 mm) was studied. The simulation results of rolling needle and cage are shown in Fig. 18 and Fig. 19, while under different fillet radius of needle rollers.
Fig. 17
Download: Download high-res image (137KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 17. Initial fillet of needle roller.

Fig. 18
Download: Download high-res image (282KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 18. The maximum stress,deformation ofunder different fillet radius of needle rollers.

Fig. 19
Download: Download high-res image (40KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 19. The maximum inclination of the needle roller under different fillet radius.

Fig. 18, Fig. 19 show that it caneffectively reduce the maximumvon Mises stress, total deformation and inclination β while appropriately increasing the fillet radius. For example, the maximum stress of the needle roller and the cage are 684.36 MPa, 98.878Mpa, and the inclination is 0.0272°while the fillet radius is 0.75 mm. The maximum stress, deformation and inclination reduced by 48.62%, 66.19% and 48.09% respectively while compared to fillet radius is 0.25 mm. The results show that the fillet radius of needle roller have obvious influence on the maximum stress, deformationand inclination of the needle roller and the cage. By increasing the fillet angle to about 0.75 mm, the maximum stress and deformation can be reduced.
7. Conclusion
A new modelfor analyzing the influence of the structural parameters of main shaft on the offset force P required for eccentric ring, the deflection angle θ at the lower end of the main shaft, the counterforce R1 of self-aligning bearing and the counterforce R2 of cantilever bearing is introduced.The effects of the distance between components and the stiffness of the shell are considered. A FE model of main shaft with cantilever bearing and self-aligning bearing is established to analyze the causes of failure of cantilever bearing. The theoretical model and the FE model are verified by experiments. The main conclusions of this paper are summarized as follows:
1.
The stiffness and inner diameter of the shell have little effect on the target parameters (θ, R1,R2). All those target parameters increase with the increase of the stiffness and decrease with the increasement of the inner diameter of the shell, but the increase and decrease amplitude are smaller.
2.
The target parameters aredecrease with the increase of the distance between eccentric ring and bearings,deflection angle satisfies the minimum angle of the tool within the range of L2's changes in the analysis, but L1 should not be less than 0.64 m since the deflection angle must be bigger than the θmin.While the distance between the cantilever bearing and the self-aligning bearing is invariant, except that the counterforce R2 decreases with the increase of L1/L,other target parameters are reduced first and then increased with the increase of L1/L, and the L1/L should less than 0.24 or bigger than 0.76 to meet the requirement of the θmin.
3.
Base on the original structure parameters of wellbore trajectory control tool of high build-up rate, the radial force at the cantilever bearing can be reduced by decreasing the inner diameter of shell, increasing the distance between the eccentric ring and the self-aligning bearing, increasing distance between the eccentric ring and the cantilever bearing, or reducing the ratio coefficient of L1/L while the distance of L is invariant.
4.
The needle and cage edge produce stress concentration, that gradually wears the roller needle and cage. The inclined angle, small filletradiusor no fillet of needle roller seriously affect the life of cantilever bearing and accelerate the failure of the needle and cage, and eventually lead to the failure of the cantilever bearing.The maximum stress, deformation and inclinationare reduced by 48.62%,66.19%,48.09% respectively while changing the fillet radius from 0.25 mm to 0.75 mm.
According to the results of mechanical analysis and FE analysis, thecantilever bearing must be able to bear radial force and bending moment simultaneously, and the combined bearing of needle and angular contact ball (NKIB) can bear both radial and axial loads, and prolong the service life of bearing.In addition to the above method of reducing radial force and moderately increasing the filletradius of the needle roller, the working clearance of the bearing, the matching clearance between the main shaft and the bearing needle and the fit clearance between the bearing cage and the bearing sleeve are reduced as far as possible.And the machining and assembly accuracy is improved, which can reduce the damage of cantilever bearing and increase its life span.