Abstract
The tungsten plasma facing components (PFCs) in fusion devices must withstand high heat loads. Recrystallization sets in under such conditions and embrittles tungsten, hence motivating its mitigation. He plasma exposure, a natural consequence of the deuterium–tritium reaction, has been shown to retard recrystallization, the mechanism of which was generally attributed to the Zener pinning of grain boundaries during the grain growth stage of recrystallization. However, neither the Zener pinning effect was quantified nor its role in the nucleation stage of recrystallization was considered, limiting our understanding and exploitation of this beneficial phenomenon. Here, we approach this problem by splitting the conventional annealing experiment into finer steps using a powerful electron beam at 1573 K. After each 15 min annealing of the He plasma exposed tungsten specimen, the same area was examined by electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) to detect recrystallized grains and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to observe subsurface He bubbles. We found that near-surface recrystallization was retarded at 1573 K. Surprisingly, site-specific TEM imaging revealed that recrystallization was retarded even when the grain boundaries of the recrystallized grains were not pinned by He bubbles, which directly contradicts previous assumptions. Additionally, the pressure balance on the grain boundaries suggested that grain growth was unfavorable, even in the absence of the Zener pinning pressure. Instead, recrystallization and its suppression were dominated by nucleation, as supported by EBSD analysis of the nucleation rate. A model based on He bubbles limited subgrain growth was developed and quantitatively agreed with the recrystallization fraction trend at 1573 K. Overall, we demonstrate He bubbles limited subgrain growth as a viable mechanism of retarding recrystallization. Moreover, it is a promising model for identifying a regime of retarded recrystallization for tungsten PFCs in fusion devices.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
TungstenRecrystallizationHe bubblesZener pinningSubgrain growth
1. Introduction
An outstanding challenge in fusion devices is to improve the power handling limit of the tungsten plasma facing components (PFCs) [1]. Recrystallization sets in when pushing this limit, e.g., it takes 3.58 h to reach half-hardness loss at 1623 K for moderately-deformed tungsten [2]. Unfortunately, contrary to most metals, recrystallization embrittles tungsten, as demonstrated by three-point bending [3], single-edge notched tension testing [4] of small-scale specimens, and cyclic high heat flux loading of ITER-like tungsten monoblocks in electron beam [5] and linear plasma [6] facilities. In light of this, an operational budget for the ITER divertor has been proposed based on the avoidance of deep recrystallization of tungsten monoblocks [7]. Therefore, mitigating the recrystallization of tungsten prolongs the lifetime of the ITER divertor.
Although a plethora of particles can be used to mitigate recrystallization, He bubbles are an attractive option because they are constantly produced during He plasma and neutron irradiation. First reported by Guo et al, He plasma exposure retarded recrystallization in tungsten [8], which was confirmed by subsequent experiments [[9], [10], [11], [12]]. However, a close inspection of previous work suggests that the mechanism of He bubbles retarded recrystallization is not fully understood. For example, Guo et al. attributed retarded recrystallization to the obstruction of grain boundary migration by He bubbles segregated therein. They supported this explanation with a TEM image showing He bubbles at grain boundaries of a pre-thinned W specimen exposed to 4.5 
 1024 m−2 He plasma followed by 1 h of annealing at 1423 K [8]. However, it is not clear whether the grain boundaries shown surround recrystallized grains or not. The Zener equation was explicitly considered in Ref. [9] to illustrate that the smaller the He bubbles the stronger the pinning pressure but without quantifying its magnitude and comparing it with other pressures on the grain boundary. The ratio between the Zener pinning pressure and the retarding pressure due to the boundary curvature was evaluated in Ref. [11] to reason that Zener pinning caused retarded recrystallization but they did not consider the driving pressure due to stored dislocations.
The aim of the present paper is to improve our understanding of He bubbles retarded recrystallization in tungsten. To this end, a novel experimental approach was taken. After He plasma exposure, interrupted annealing of tungsten specimens was performed using a powerful electron beam, which enabled rapid heating and cooling. Following each period of annealing, the same area was examined by electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) to detect recrystallized grains and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to observe subsurface He bubbles. Such refined analyses revealed unprecedented microstructural detail and led to the discovery of a new mechanism of He bubbles retarded near-surface recrystallization in tungsten.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Tungsten specimen
Specimens measuring 
 mm3 were cut from a 
 mm3 tungsten plate provided by Beijing Antai Zhongke Metals Co., Ltd., China. The plate was produced by powder metallurgy, followed by multi-pass rolling at decreasing temperatures to a thickness reduction of ∼90 %. The chemical composition of the plate is listed in Table 1. A conventional metallographic procedure was applied to obtain mirror-like surfaces. No stress relief annealing was performed.
Table 1. Chemical composition of the tungsten plate.

Element	Fe	Ni	Si	C	O	N	W
Content, wt%	<0.001	<0.001	<0.002	0.0055	<0.002	<0.002	>99.95
2.2. Plasma exposure and electron beam annealing
He plasma exposure was performed in the SPARROW linear plasma device [13]. The electron temperature and electron density were measured by a reciprocating Langmuir probe, and the target surface temperature was measured by a two-color pyrometer (model QKTRD 1075–1). The full width at half maximum of the plasma beam was ∼20 mm, the peak particle flux was ∼2.4 
 1023 m-2s−1, and the ion impact energy was ∼50 eV (by negatively biassing the target). The average surface temperature was 853 ± 39 K and the accumulated peak particle fluence was 8.64 
 1026 m−2. Annealing experiments were conducted by scanning a high-density electron beam (22 kV, 30–60 mA) uniformly across the specimen surfaces [14], the temperature during which was monitored with a two-color pyrometer (model QKTRD 1085–1). The beam was rastered over the entire specimen surface, which received He plasma exposure. No additional heating was applied to the specimen during electron beam annealing. The vacuum pressure was ∼6.6 
 10-3 Pa during annealing.
2.3. Microstructure analysis
2.3.1. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis
The dislocation density was estimated from the peak broadening of diffracted X-rays. An X'Pert3 diffractometer was used to collect diffracted Cu 
 radiation that was excited by a Cu anode operating at 40 kV and 40 mA. The incident angle was 1.5°, the step size was 0.03°, and the collection time per step was 1.2 s. The (110), (200), (211), and (220) reflections were recorded, followed by 
 and instrumental broadening subtraction and Gaussian fit to determine each peak width (full width at half maximum), 
. According to the modified Williamson-Hall plot method [15]:
(1)
in which 
 and 
. 
 is the diffraction angle, 
 the wavelength of the 
 X-ray (0.15406 nm), d the crystallite size, and b the Burgers vector of dislocations (2.74 Å for tungsten). The average contrast factor, C, was calculated according to Ref. [16] assuming that all slip systems were populated with the same amount of edge and screw dislocations. Taking the upper limit of A 
 1, which is well established [17], Eq. (1) yields the lower limit of the dislocation density, 
, when plotting 
 over 
.
2.3.2. EBSD analysis
EBSD measurements were conducted in a Zeiss Sigma 300 scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with an Oxford C-Nano detector. The scanning voltage was 20 kV and the step size was 0.5–0.6
 m. The MTEX toolbox [18] was used to post-process the data. A threshold value of 2° for the misorientation angle between two adjacent pixels was used for grain reconstruction.
Of particular importance here is the detection of recrystallized grains, the criterion of which was not adequately justified in previous studies for tungsten. As demonstrated by Ayad et al. [19], an improved approach is to combine two criteria: (i) the Grain Orientation Spread (GOS) 
 limit_1, and (ii) 
 limit_2, where 
 is the radius of the same grain. A satisfactory combination of limit_1 and limit_2 should result in negligible recrystallization fraction for the deformed state, whereas close to 100 % recrystallization fraction for the fully recrystallized state. Applying this idea to a tungsten specimen that was rolled at 873 K in the final pass with an accumulated thickness reduction of ∼80 %—which can be considered as purely deformed, and to another tungsten specimen which was annealed at 2000 K for 2 h—which can be considered as fully recrystallized, we found that a combination of GOS < 2.5° and 
 0.3°/
 m yielded a 0.27 % area fraction of recrystallized grains for the former specimen and a 99.96 % area fraction of recrystallized grains for the latter. This criterion was used throughout the paper.
2.3.3. TEM analysis
Site-specific cross-sectional TEM lamellae were prepared by the focused ion beam lift-out technique [20] using a Helios G4 UX DualBeam system. A Ga+ ion beam with decreasing voltages and currents was used for milling and thinning. When the lamella was thinned to around 100 nm, the combination was 2 kV and 10 pA. TEM imaging was performed in a Talos F200X scanning transmission electron microscope.
3. Results
3.1. Microstructures before and after He plasma exposure
Fig. 1(a) displays the typical grain morphology in the as polished specimen. Based on the EBSD measurement, the inverse pole figure of which will be provided in Fig. 4, it mostly consists of (100) and (111) grains when viewed from the normal direction of the specimen surface. The average grain radius is 1.62 ± 1.46
 m. From the modified Williamson-Hall plot in Fig. 1(b), the lower bound of the dislocation density is (4.66 ± 2.41)
 1014 m−2.

Download: Download high-res image (238KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Microstructure of the as polished specimen. (a) Surface morphology. (b) The modified Williamson-Hall plot.

He plasma exposure was then applied to create subsurface He bubbles. The surface temperature during plasma exposure was kept low enough to avoid ‘fuzz’ (nano tendrils) formation, which is confirmed by subsequent surface imaging in Fig. 2(a). Consistent with our previous study [21], orientation-dependent surface morphologies developed, e.g., cubic corner structures in the boxed area, the close-up of which is shown in Fig. 2(b). The subsurface He bubble morphology is revealed by bright-field (BF) TEM imaging in Fig. 2(c) under underfocus and Fig. 2(d) under overfocus condition, respectively. The He bubbles appear as bright spots surrounded by a dark fringe under the underfocus condition and the contrast reversals under the overfocus condition. Clearly, the underfocus condition enhances the visualization of He bubbles and will therefore be used for further imaging purposes. The bubble diameter was measured in the ImageJ program by drawing a line across each bubble. The number of distinct measurements decreases with increasing annealing time, being 504, 379, 251, 220, and 73, respectively. The volume fraction was calculated by assuming spherical bubbles with the TEM lamella thickness measured from its cross-sectional SEM image. The bubble volume fraction is 0.61 ± 0.05 %, and the average bubble radius is 5.27 ± 3.05 nm. The error bar is one standard deviation in length.

Download: Download high-res image (312KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Microstructure after He plasma exposure. (a) Surface morphology, in which the boxed area is magnified in (b). Cross-sectional BF-TEM images showing subsurface He bubble morphology of the same area under (c) underfocus, and (d) overfocus conditions.

3.2. Recrystallization kinetics
Fig. 3 shows the specimen surface temperatures during interrupted electron beam annealing experiments. The 1573 K plateau temperature is a typical recrystallization temperature of tungsten [22]. The temperature uncertainty specified by the pyrometer manufacturer is 0.5 % of the reading, i.e. 8 K. Furthermore, we calibrated the pyrometer against a thermocouple and estimated the upper bound of the temperature uncertainty as ∼25 K. An advantage of electron beam annealing is that the heating and cooling rates are much faster than those during conventional furnace annealing (∼1000 vs. 5 ∼20 K/min), which simplifies the subsequent analyses, e.g., the influence of recovery during temperature ramping can be reduced. Between each 15 min of annealing, EBSD and TEM measurements were conducted within the same 
 
 m2 area of each specimen.

Download: Download high-res image (176KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Surface temperature profiles during interrupted electron beam annealing at 1573 ± 25 K.

The corresponding EBSD results of each stage are displayed in Fig. 4. The color-coded Z-axis inverse pole figure (IPF) and distribution of recrystallized grains are shown in parallel, the colors in which are referred to the color key (bottom left) and color bar (bottom right), respectively. 
, which denotes the area fraction of recrystallized grains, gradually increases from 7.95 % to 18.80 % for the as polished (reference) specimen. The recrystallized grains in the initial microstructures result from dynamic recrystallization during the hot-rolling process. In stark contrast, 
 for the He plasma exposed specimen changes slowly—being almost stagnant for the first 45 min (Fig. 5). Therefore, the key observation is that recrystallization is retarded in He plasma exposed tungsten at 1573 K. Tracking the evolution of recrystallization grains in the same area in each specimen reduces uncertainties caused by the microstructural variation across even the same specimen, which is also an improvement over previous studies.

Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Recrystallization kinetics at 1573 K. The color-coded Z-axis IPF maps and distribution of recrystallized grains for the as-polished specimen and He plasma exposed specimen, respectively. The green arrow indicates the annealing time.


Download: Download high-res image (133KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Trend of 
. The dashed lines are guides to the eye.

Besides 
, the numbers and average radii of the recrystallized grains are lumped together in Table 2. These numbers are not provided for the stage just after He plasma exposure (0 min) because the EBSD indexing success rates in these cases are worse than 80 %, probably due to subsurface He bubbles and surface modifications (Fig. 2).
Table 2. Statistics of area fractions, radii, and numbers of recrystallized grains. The error bar is one standard deviation in length.

Annealing time, min	Area fraction of ReX grains, %	Radius of ReX grains, 
 m	Number of ReX grains
As polished	He exposed	As polished	He exposed	As polished	He exposed
0	7.95	−	1.27 ± 0.7	−	740	−
15	12.29	7.54	1.31 ± 0.8	1.29 ± 0.8	1048	652
30	12.68	7.48	1.29 ± 0.8	1.15 ± 0.7	1086	851
45	14.24	7.07	1.35 ± 0.8	1.11 ± 0.6	1156	915
60	18.80	8.75	1.5 ± 0.9	1.18 ± 0.7	1211	914
3.3. Distribution of He bubbles
To explain the trend of 
, we imaged subsurface He bubbles via TEM following each EBSD scan of the He plasma exposed specimen. More specifically, a fine EBSD scan of a subregion was first conducted to identify recrystallized grains. Next, a TEM lamella across at least a grain boundary between a recrystallized grain and a non-recrystallized grain was prepared. The corresponding BF-TEM micrographs are shown in Fig. 6, in which the recrystallized grains are outlined by the yellow dashed lines. The key observation is that He bubbles are not present at the grain boundaries surrounding the recrystallized grains except for that after 15 min of annealing (white arrows). The volume fractions and sizes of He bubbles are summarized in Table 3.

Download: Download high-res image (201KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Stitched BF-TEM images showing the time evolution of He bubbles during annealing at 1573 K. The green arrow indicates the annealing time, the yellow dashed lines outline the recrystallized grains, and the white arrows highlight He bubbles at the grain boundaries.

Table 3. Statistics of volume fractions and sizes of He bubbles. The error bars are one standard deviation in length.

Annealing time, min	Volume fraction of He bubbles, %	Radius of He bubbles, nm
0	0.61 ± 0.05	5.27 ± 3.05
15	0.11 ± 0.05	2.55 ± 1.11
30	0.07 ± 0.03	2.40 ± 1.13
45	0.06 ± 0.01	2.38 ± 1.09
60	0.03 ± 0.01	2.23 ± 0.80
To validate the above phenomenon, we repeated the experiment at 1673 K for 30 min. The distribution of recrystallization grains is compared in Fig. 7(a–b), in which 
 for the as polished and He exposed specimen is 27.06 % and 26.40 %, respectively. In line with the similar 
 values, the cross-sectional TEM micrographs from the He exposed specimen in Fig. 7(c) reveal no He bubbles.

Download: Download high-res image (961KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. The distribution of recrystallized grains in (a) the as polished specimen, and (b) the He exposed specimen after annealing at 1673 K for 30 min. (c) The corresponding cross-sectional TEM micrographs of the He exposed specimen. The yellow dashed line marks the recrystallized grain.

Finally, we examined the He retention through thermal desorption. The motivation is to assess the possible influence of He atoms, which are invisible in TEM images, on recrystallization. The measurements were performed in a separate set-up with < 1 × 10−5 Pa base pressure and a calibrated mass spectrometer (Pfeiffer Vacuum PrismaPlus QMG 220). The heating rate was 10 K/min. The spectrum in Fig. 8 reveals negligible He retention after 60 min of electron beam annealing at 1573 K. In contrast, a major desorption peak centered at ∼1100 K exists for the specimen that received the same He plasma exposure. From the peer review process, we learn that the desorption behaviour of He depends on the plasma exposure condition, e.g., higher desorption peaks occur after lower flux and lower surface temperature He plasma exposure, cf. Fig. 3 in Ref. [23] and Fig. 2 in Ref. [24], which deserves detailed investigation in the future.

Download: Download high-res image (228KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. He desorption spectra before and after electron beam annealing.

4. Discussion
Although retarded recrystallization after He plasma exposure is observed in our experiments, it does not fit previous explanations, as elaborated below.
4.1. Insufficiency of previous analyses
Zener pinning of high angle grain boundaries (HAGBs) during the grain growth stage of recrystallization is the chief theory implied in previous explanations. It involves two important elements. First, He bubbles must be present at the HAGBs surrounding the recrystallized grains. Second, the Zener pinning pressure is the leading pressure term. In our experiments, recrystallization is still retarded when He bubbles are absent from the grain boundaries surrounding the recrystallized grains (Fig. 6, 30–60 min). Therefore, the retarded recrystallization in these cases must have been caused by a different mechanism.
Let us consider the pressures during recrystallization in more detail. The net driving pressure for grain growth during recrystallization, 
, is [25]:
(2)
 refers to the driving pressure, in which 
 is the dislocation density, 
 the shear modulus, and 
 the Burgers vector of the dislocation. 
 refers to the Zener pinning pressure, in which 
 and 
 are the volume fraction and radius of the He bubbles, respectively. 
 is the energy of the pinned grain boundary. 
 refers to the retarding pressure due to the boundary curvature, in which 
 is the grain radius. Recrystallized grains will not grow unless 
 is positive. The values of the constituent parameters are listed in Table 4, in which 
 is the shear module at 1573 K [26] and 
 is the average grain boundary energy [27].
Table 4. Values of the input parameters in Eq. (2).

Parameter	Value	Units	Source
4.66 
 1014	m−2	Measured by XRD
129.26	GPa	Ref. [26]
2.74	Å	Ref. [28]
0.03–0.61 %	−	Measured by TEM
2.32	J/m2	Ref. [27]
2.23–5.27	nm	Measured by TEM
1.11–1.29	
 m	Measured by EBSD
 is negative, Fig. 9, suggesting that grain growth during recrystallization is unfavorable. However, 
 is already negative, and the magnitude of 
 is more than twice 
, implying a limited influence of 
 on recrystallization. Moreover, the fact that 
 for the reference specimen (green squares) is negative indicates that nucleation rather than growth is the dominant recrystallization process in our experiments.

Download: Download high-res image (152KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Pressures on the grain boundaries during annealing at 1573 K. The dashed lines are guides to the eye.

The theoretical analysis is corroborated by EBSD measurements. For the as polished specimen, the average radius of recrystallized grains increases slowly with annealing time, Fig. 10(a), which contrasts that of the number of recrystallized grains, as shown in the left-axis of Fig. 10(b). As expected, the average grain size of the non-recrystallized grains varies negligibly following the different annealing steps (Appendix B). Moreover, from Fig. 10(b), a positive correlation between the number of recrystallized grains and the fraction of recrystallized grains is observed for both specimens. If we make the reasonable assumption that each recrystallized grain originates from a nucleus, it follows that it is the suppression of the nucleation process that results in retarded recrystallization after He plasma exposure.

Download: Download high-res image (213KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 10. Trend of (a) radius, and (b) number of recrystallized grains during annealing at 1573 K. The dashed lines are guides to the eye.

4.2. Mechanism of He bubble suppressed nucleation
A recrystallization nucleus by definition is separated by a HAGB, the number of which increases during recrystallization. One of the prominent HAGB production pathways is subgrain growth from regions of orientation gradient [29]. If the size to which a subgrain can grow is limited by particles, nucleation is suppressed [30,31]. As schematically shown in Fig. 11(a), it differs from previous explanations in that it is the pinning of subgrain boundaries rather than HAGBs of recrystallized grains—as supported by TEM imaging of He bubble distribution in Fig. 6—that results in retarded recrystallization.

Download: Download high-res image (313KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 11. Mechanism of He bubbles suppressed recrystallization nucleation. Schematic diagram showing recrystallization by discontinuous subgrain growth (a) without, and (b) with He bubbles. (c) Prediction of the model, in which the thresholds are calculated according to Eq. (5).

Furthermore, the criterion for suppression of nucleation, to a first approximation, is:
(3)
in which 
 is the orientation gradient and 
 is the critical misorientation angle. 
 is given by the Zener limiting grain size [32]:
(4)
where 
 is a shape factor. Combining Eqs. (3), (4), the criterion for nucleation suppression becomes:
(5)
For
 < 0.05, 
=0.35; the recommended values for 
 and 
 are 15° and 5° 
 m−1, respectively [25]. 3–5° 
 m−1 of 
 are frequently measured values in our specimen (Appendix A). Using these values and taking the equal sign in Eq. (5), the thresholds for the suppression of nucleation are plotted in Fig. 11(c). It correctly predicts the 
 trend of the annealing experiments. More interestingly, when the lowest data point (after 60 min of annealing) approaches the thresholds—meaning that the suppression of nucleation is weakened, the corresponding 
 increases. As such, it is favorable to state that our proposed mechanism is supported by both experimental evidence and theoretical consistency.
The recrystallization of metals and alloys typically consists of two regimes—nucleation and growth. Previous studies focused on the Zener pinning of recrystallized grains during the growth stage, assuming that He bubbles always surrounded the HAGBs of such grains and that the Zener pinning pressure was significant. Our results challenge such assumptions and highlight the role of nucleation and its suppression by He bubbles. Although Zener pinning is still central to the suppression mechanism, it is the pinning of subgrain boundaries rather than HAGBs that retards recrystallization. Note that subgrain boundaries and HAGBs are fundamentally different microstructural entities, the former can be viewed as an array of dislocations whereas the latter contains well-defined repeating structural units [25].
4.3. Limitations and future improvements
Validation and exploitation of Eq. (5) suffer from uncertainties of the orientation gradient, 
 and the bubble parameters, 
 and 
. As demonstrated in Appendix A, the value of 
 depends on the length of the path along which the measurement is performed. Unfortunately, the authors are not aware of an improved way to reduce this uncertainty at this moment. On the other hand, it is well-known that very small bubbles are invisible by TEM imaging. Refinements in the measurement of these quantities will be developed in future work.
The annealing experiment at 1673 K points to the importance of understanding temperature dependent He bubble stability and mobility. Direct imaging of bubble growth is limited to relatively low temperatures, e.g., at 1273 K by grazing incidence small angle X-ray scattering [33] and up to 1013 K by in-situ TEM annealing [34]. Thermal desorption experiments up to 1900 K are available but only provide indirect information on bubble evolution [23]. Moreover, as mentioned earlier, the desorption spectrum is sensitive to the plasma loading condition. We plan to systematically study the annealing behaviour of He bubbles in the near future.
We also observed staggering surface morphology transformation during recrystallization. This is vividly illustrated in Fig. 12: A smooth recrystallized grain nucleates from grains remained of He plasma exposure induced surface structures after annealing at 1300 °C for 15 min. The micrograph indicates significant surface processes such as adatom diffusion and the absorption of lattice defects, which may have mediated the recrystallization kinetics. This should be examined in greater detail in future work.

Download: Download high-res image (129KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 12. Surface smoothing during recrystallization.

On a final note, we expect He atoms to contribute negligibly to retarded recrystallization. This is substantiated by the fact that most of the He atoms have outgassed after annealing at 1573 K for 60 min but recrystallization is still substantially retarded. However, the role of dissolved He atoms in early stages remain unclear. The desorption spectrum of the He exposed specimen in Fig. 8 suggests that annealing at 1270 K for ∼30 min removes most of the retained He atoms. Therefore, it can be further inferred that He atoms are not involved in the recrystallization process after 30 min of electron beam annealing at 1573 K. TDS experiments of He containing specimens with a rapid heating rate to 1573 K would provide a better understanding of the He desorption kinetics. An ultra-high-temperature TDS set-up is on our purchase list.
4.4. General implications
Eq. (5) is simple but powerful. 
 describes the microstructure of the target and is related to the processing history. 
 and 
 describe the bubble characteristics and are determined by the exposure condition. 
 can be measured by EBSD. Therefore, once a quantitative relation between 
 and 
 and the plasma exposure condition (flux, ion energy, surface temperature, etc.) is established in laboratory devices, Eq. (5) can be used to identify an operational window of retarded recrystallization for tungsten PFCs in fusion devices. Retarded recrystallization is beneficial for ITER’s operational budget as explained in the Introduction Section. However, we should point out that only near-surface recrystallization is likely to be retarded by low-energy He plasma exposure induced bubbles because of their shallow distribution. Therefore, we expect that retarded near-surface recrystallization may make the tungsten divertor more tolerant to ELMs, which interact strongly with the surface layer [35,36] during which the HAGBs are preferred crack nucleation sites [37]. Additionally, it can be used to design particle-reinforced tungsten alloys with optimal recrystallization resistance.
5. Conclusions
In summary, by combining interrupted electron beam annealing experiment, detailed microstructure analysis and analytical modelling, we have studied He bubbles-mediated recrystallization in tungsten. The main findings are as follows:
1.
He bubbles retard near-surface recrystallization in tungsten at 1573 K.
2.
Helium bubbles retard recrystallization by limiting subgrain growth, which is supported by EBSD analysis of the nucleation rate, TEM analysis of the He bubble distribution, and analytical modelling.