1. Introduction
AISI 316L stainless steel is widely used in many applications because of its optimum corrosion properties, easy maintenance in different environments, and good mechanical properties [1,2]. This material can be used to produce orthopedic implants as it is biocompatible [3].
AISI 316L stainless steel can also be constructed via various 3D printing techniques. Selective Laser Melting (SLM), in particular, is one of the most common technologies used for the production of AISI 316L monoliths. The process is a powder bed fusion technique in which the powder metals are melted in individual layers in order to obtain components with geometry that is close to the final shape required. Many researchers have studied the microstructure [[4], [5], [6], [7]], corrosion [3,8,9], wear [[10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15]], and mechanical properties [[16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21]] of these components, but only a few have also tested their performance at high temperatures [15].
Using the additive manufacturing technique to produce AISI 316L results in a nano-sized microstructure composed of primary austenite with non-equilibrium eutectic delta ferrite inside each solidified cell [7]. This nano-sized microstructure is then responsible for the formation of a macrostructure by fibration, which is linked to the epitaxial growth of each solidification cell [5]. The 3D-printed materials also present a higher dislocation density [20] with a randomly distributed, nano-sized dispersion of silica inclusions [7] that result from the solidification process. Macro defects, pores, and voids often occur during solidification; however, a high density (>99.9 %) can be achieved by optimizing the parameters involved in the SLM process [22]. It is worth noting that porosity can be also reduced considerably by applying Hot Isostatic Pressing (HIP) treatments [22]. The microstructure of the 3D printed material has as strong influence on the mechanical properties, and additively manufactured AISI 316L demonstrates a higher yield strength (YS) and lower elongation (E %) than the same material produced using other technologies [19,21]. The considerable anisotropy of the 3D printed materials was particularly obvious in these studies, particularly in samples that were aligned along the direction of the SLM growth, which exhibited the worst performance [6]. Heat treatments usually affect the distribution of the microstructure at above 600 °C, but no effects were observed in terms of the mechanical properties [16]. It was also demonstrated that the material reacts via the agglomeration of the nano-structured phases, without any modification to the macrostructure.
It was also noted that 3D printed AISI 316L is more resistant to corrosion than material that has been forged [8], because of the finer microstructure and smaller inclusions.
Several results have also been published concerning the wear resistance of AISI 316L under both dry and wet conditions [10,11,[13], [14], [15]]. Yang et al. [10] studied the effect that the direction of growth has on the tribological properties of AISI 316L steel, observing anisotropy in the wear behavior when the material was tested at very low loads, whereas isotropic behavior was detected at high loads. Bartolomeu et al. [14] studied the wear resistance of 3D printed AISI 316L that was immersed in body fluids, and observed that the wear resistance of the 3D printed material is higher than that of the same material derived using HIP or casting. A clear correlation was also apparent between the wear resistance and the mechanical properties of the material, such as hardness and tensile strength. A detailed study concerning the wear resistance of AISI 316L produced via SLM was carried out recently by Li et al. [13,15]. Experiments to investigate wear were conducted with loads of up to 30 N and temperatures reaching 600 °C. The wear rate was found to increase as a function of the temperature up to 400 °C, after which it was observed to decrease; however, it remained higher than that of other tests performed at room temperature. It was also found that the friction coefficient decreased continuously as the temperature increased due to the formation of a triboxide film, produced during the wear test, that protected the underneath material mainly at high temperatures. The triboxide film formation was favored by the temperature increase in the wear track, in combination with the imposed external temperature. The triboxidation mechanism was well evidenced by authors [13,15] using SEM observations of the wear track. On the other side, triboxides layers can also be found in the wear tracks of materials tested at room temperature because the flash temperature, generated by the relative friction of the tribological system, can reach temperatures typical of oxidative process. The triboxidation is strongly influenced by: testing temperature, coefficient of friction, applied load and sliding speed. The chemistry of the formed oxides, instead, is strongly related to the chemical composition of the materials used in the tribosystem.
This study aims to understand the wear behavior of 3D printed material under extreme Hertzian loads. The evolution of the tribolayer in terms of both composition and the thickness of the triboxide and the underlying strain-hardened layer are studied. The experimental conditions are selected in order to simulate the tribological conditions of a steel working process, in accordance with those used in a previous study [23]. The aim of the study is to provide new insights concerning the microstructural evolution of 3D printed material in comparison to forged material, which is used as a reference.
2. Experimental setup
2.1. Sample preparation
The 3D printed samples were obtained using a commercial 316L stainless steel powder, with the chemical composition given in Table 1.
Table 1. Chemical composition of the 316L stainless steel powder used in the experiment.

Chemical element	C	Cr	Fe	Mn	Mo	Ni	P	S	Si
316L stainless steel (% weight)	0.025	17.7	Bal.	1.14	2.35	12	<0.045	0.004	0.61
The powder particles were characterized with a regular spherical shape (Fig. 1) and a granulometric distribution in the range 18.17 μm (10th %ile) - 45.44 μm (90th %ile), with a median particle diameter of 28.72 μm (Fig. 1a)). The particles produced were in the form of a columnar/dendritic austenitic microstructure (Fig. 1c)).
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (895KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. a) Progressive and cumulative granulometric distribution of the 316L stainless steel powder. b) SEM image of the powders. C) microstructure of the powders (glyceregia etching).

The samples were manufactured using a Concept Laser M2 Cusing machine that was equipped with a single‐mode CW ytterbium‐doped fiber laser with an emission wavelength of 1070 nm. The process was carried out in an inert argon atmosphere with an oxygen partial pressure of less than 0.2 %. The main process parameters used in production are given in Table 2.
Table 2. Process parameters used for the samples manufacture.

Empty Cell	Specimens	Support structures
Power	180 W	130 W
Scanning speed	600 mm/s	1000 mm/s
Spot diameter	120 μm	50 μm
Hatch distance	105 μm	–
Layer thickness	25 μm	50 μm
The parts were processed according to the island exposure strategy, producing a checkerboard pattern consisting of 5 × 5 mm squares that were obtained by bi-directionally scanning consecutive single tracks. The adjacent islands were allowed to overlap by 105 μm and were scanned along mutually perpendicular directions. The islands were rotated by 90° and moved by 1 mm along the X and Y directions for the production of each subsequent layer. These changes were implemented in order to minimize the systematic effects that can occur on 3D printed components that are caused by using of a specific laser trajectory.
A total of 40 specimens were prepared with a size of 30.5 × 20.5 × 7 mm. Of these, 20 were oriented parallel to the building platform and 20 were oriented perpendicular to it (Fig. 2). All the specimens were manufactured in one single session with the two different orientations randomly arranged on the building platform in order to avoid any possible dependence on the spatial position of the specimen. Finally, the samples were oriented at 45° with respect to the direction of recoating in order to promote the formation of regular and uniform layers of powder.
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (304KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. SLM material produced for the experimental investigation.

The chemical composition of the two alloys (massive 3D printed samples) is listed in Table 3. Please note that the samples were not heat treated.
Table 3. Chemical composition of the analyzed samples (Balanced on Fe, results in wt%).

Empty Cell	Cr	Ni	Mo	Mn	Si	C [ppm]	O [ppm]	S [ppm]	P [ppm]	N [ppm]
3D printed	17.6	12.8	2.3	1.1	0.65	200	245	40	36	830
Forged material	17.4	12.1	2.1	1.6	0.3	200	52	20	40	360
Chemical composition range [24]	16−18	10−14	2.00−3.00	Max 2.00	Max. 1.00	Max 300	–	Max. 100	Max. 250	Max 1000
The additively manufactured samples were then milled in order to obtain flat specimens (20 × 30 × 5 mm3) with the dimensions required for measurement using the tribometer. The surface that was to be lacerated was also ground with abrasive papers (P 1200) in order to obtain a surface roughness (Ra) of 0.2 μm.
A specimen of forged material was used as reference in this study. In this case, the material used was purchased from a local producer and then machined to obtain the same final geometry and surface quality as the post-processed additively manufactured specimens.
2.2. Preliminary microstructural characterization
The 3D printed samples and forged material were characterized microstructurally in the area associated with the top view, which corresponds to the area that is generally exposed to wear, and embedded in epoxy resin for metallographic preparation (grinding with abrasive paper and polishing with textile cloths wetted using diamond suspensions), in order to obtain a mirror like surface. The samples were then etched, using acetic glyceregia (15 ml HCl, 10 ml acetic acid, 5 ml nitric acid, and 1 drop glycerol) for 60 s, following which the microstructure was analyzed using both a light microscope (Olympus GX 41) and SEM-EDXS (Zeiss Evo 40, Inca X sight). Each sample was then subjected to 3 Vickers micro-indentations (with a load of 2 kg for 20 s using Struers Duramin).
2.3. Tribological characterization
The samples were tested using a CETR UMT-3 instrument in a ball-on-flat configuration. The tribometer was equipped with a 2 axis load cell with a maximum payload of 1 kN. An alumina sphere (9.5 mm diameter) was used as the counter material. The stroke length, total displacement, and frequency were set at 10 mm, 360 m, and 10 Hz, respectively, and a load of 40 N was applied in order to achieve a maximum contact pressure of approximately 1850 MPa at room temperature. A detailed schematic of the apparatus used can be found in a previous study [25]. The tests were executed at 25 °C, 200 °C, 400 °C, and 600 °C. In order to guarantee a uniform temperature distribution, the material was maintained at the test temperature for 1 h before starting the test. A constant temperature was maintained during the test by using a thermo-regulated chamber, and the COF was acquired continuously at a frequency of 10 points/s.
The volume loss of the worn samples was measured using a stylus profilometer (Dektak 120, with a tip radius of 12.5 μm). A total of 6 scans were performed across the worn area of each sample. The wear rate was then calculated using [[25], [26], [27]]:
(1)
where V [mm3] is the loss in volume calculated by the profilometer, S [m] is the sliding distance, and Fz [N] is the applied load.
2.4. Characterization of the worn samples
The wear track of the worn samples was analyzed in top view using SEM-EDXS analysis. The aim of this test was to identify the mechanisms involved in the degradation of the material. The EDXS analysis was carried out on areas both inside and outside the worn section.
The oxidized materials were also analyzed using Raman spectroscopy (T64000, Horiba, Kyoto, Japan) in order to discern the nature of the triboxides produced during the wear tests. The tests were performed using a 488 nm Nd:YVO4 diode-pumped solid-state laser (SOC JUNO, Showa Optronics Co. Ltd., Tokyo, Japan), with an acquisition time between 10 and 180 s, depending on the intensity of the Raman signal. A total of 36 points were acquired over an area of 300 × 300 μm and the spectra were then averaged in order to obtain a representative graph.
Cross sections of the worn samples were obtained from halfway along the length of the wear track using an abrasive wheel and embedded in epoxy resin. The embedded samples were subjected to metallographic preparation in order to obtain a mirror-like surface and analyzed using a light microscope after etching. The procedure used is the same as that described in the section referring to microstructural characterization. The observations carried out with the optical microscope were used in order to evaluate the thickness of the tribolayer and the extent of the strain hardened/recrystallized layer. The analyses were carried out using image analysis software (Olympus Cell’A software).
The EBSD maps were acquired to better assess the microstructural evolution beneath the wear track, using the cross sections described in the previous paragraph. Polishing with a colloidal silica was also required for this part of the analysis. The samples that had not been etched were also analyzed using EBSD (SE-SEM JSM-7001 F, produced by Jeol, equipped with Hikary Ametek probe). Maps were acquired of the material beneath the wear track in 0.5 μm steps, over a total of 330 × 220 μm. The Inverse Pole Figure (IPF) maps were elaborated using the OIM analysis software produced by Ametek.
To complete the characterization an in-depth profile of the Vickers microhardness was acquired by inspecting the cross section just below the worn area to a depth of 3 mm. The load applied and the period of loading were 1 N and 15 s, respectively, and the measurements were carried out using 0.1 mm increments between the surface of the sample to a depth of 1 mm, and 0.5 mm between 1 mm and 3 mm. The analysis carried out on the worn samples is summarized in Fig. 3, where the section AA represents the location of the cross-section used for characterization (center of the wear track).
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (154KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Summary of the locations analyzed; a) top view and b) cross section of the worn sample close to the wear track center.

3. Results and discussion
3.1. Preliminary microstructural characterization
The microstructures, acquired from the top view surface of the specimens (Fig. 3), of the 3D printed materials (a) and (b) are compared to that of the forged material (c) as shown in Fig. 4.
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Characterization of the microstructure using the light microscope: a) SLM horizontal sample, b) SLM vertical sample, c) forged sample. The arrows indicate the longitudinal section of the molten metal pool.

The microstructure of the 3D printed samples is strongly affected by the laser pattern, with features such as the scan tracks of the laser easily observed in the horizontal samples. The effects of the overlaid molten metal pools can be seen in the vertical samples. This is expected as this is a cross section of the horizontal sample. Some continuous horizontal pools that probably correspond to a longitudinal section of the scan line can also be seen in the microstructure of the vertical samples. This means that the microstructure of the 3D printed samples was completely different than the classical, austenitic, and equiassic microstructure of the forged material shown in Fig. 4(c). To better characterize the microstructure of the 3D printed samples, a detailed SEM analysis of the material was carried out (Fig. 5).
Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (661KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Detailed microstructural SEM characterization of the 3D printed samples. a) horizontal sample, b) vertical sample.

The detailed microstructural characterization using SEM shows the presence of a cellular microstructure within each melting pool, which is composed of austenite and decomposed delta ferrite in the form of a divorced eutectic structure that was produced during the rapid cooling [7]. The small grains within the material are of columnar or cellular shape. The cellular shape is likely to be cross sections of the columnar shape. The nano-sized structure is similar in both the horizontal and the vertical samples. The nano-sized microstructure that is composed of austenite and delta ferrite is also responsible for the greater hardness of this material, compared to the forged material (Table 4) [14].
Table 4. Hardness (HV2) of the analyzed samples.

Horizontal	Vertical	Forged
240 ± 12	245 ± 16	165 ± 15
3.2. Tribological characterization
The samples were subsequently tested in a ball-on-flat configuration with very high Hertzian contact stresses. These tests were performed at different temperatures. The wear rate calculated for the tested materials is shown in Fig. 6.
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (48KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Wear rate of the tested material as a function of temperature.

The wear rate of the tested material decreases as a function of temperature. This behavior can be explained by considering the evolution of the tribolayer during the experiment, as confirmed with the tribolayer analyses. Remarkably, the 3D printed samples were characterized by a lower wear rate in comparison to the forged material at temperatures below 600 °C. The main reasons for this are probably the evolution of the tribolayer and the harder microstructure of the 3D printed material. The difference between the additively manufactured samples and the forged material decreased as the temperature increased; this was probably due to the formation of triboxide, which is known to increase resistance to Hertzian loading.
It is noteworthy that almost the same wear rate was observed in both the vertical and the horizontal samples, in accordance with the results obtained by other authors [10]. This indicates that the material has isotropic tribological behavior under high Hertzian stress, which is independent of the direction of printing. For this reason, only the horizontal additively manufactured samples will be compared to the forged material in the following sections.
By analyzing the Coefficient of Friction (COF) of the tested specimens (Fig. 7), it is apparent that the forged and 3D printed materials have almost the same COF values. The COF slightly increases at room temperature during testing because of the evolution of the tribological contact beneath the wear track. In particular, the abrasive wear may be responsible for such an increase. After an initial transient, the coefficient of friction does not vary considerably during the tests carried out at high temperatures, because of the stabilization in the production of triboxide under these conditions.
Fig. 7
Download: Download high-res image (174KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. The coefficient of friction of the a) additively manufactured specimens b) and forged specimen, evaluated at different testing temperatures.

An analysis of the top view of the wear track is presented in Fig. 8.
Fig. 8
Download: Download high-res image (775KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Top view of the wear tracks obtained at different temperatures, for the 3D printed and forged specimens (horizontal) at the end of the test.

The top views of the wear tracks acquired by SEM indicate the presence of triboxidated dark grey areas mixed with the worn base metal. The area covered by triboxide increases with temperature, and at high testing temperatures (>200 °C) the wear track is completely covered with triboxide. The oxidative process is negligible in the material not interested by tribological contact. Concerning the track width, the wear track becomes thinner as the temperature increases, in agreement with the trends observed in the wear rate trend (Fig. 5). A detailed analysis of the triboxide layer was performed in order to better understand the observed behavior. Specifically, the type of oxides formed during the tribological contact and the evolution of the tribolayer were determined by evaluating the characteristics of both the triboxide layer and the underlying strain-hardened material.
The composition of the triboxide formed on surface of the samples was identified using Raman spectroscopy, which was carried out on the wear tracks of the worn samples. Comparison of the Raman results obtained from inside and outside the wear track was also conducted for the high temperature tests (T > 200 °C). The results are shown in Fig. 9.
Fig. 9
Download: Download high-res image (910KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Analysis of the Raman spectra produced by the SLM and the forged worn samples tested at: a) room temperature (see ref. in Table 5), b) 200 °C (see ref. in Table 6), c) 400 °C (see ref. in Table 7), and d) 600 °C (see ref. in Table 8).

As indicated by the Raman spectra, the analyzed samples present an evolution of the triboxides that depends on both the temperature and the type of substrate. At room temperature, the slightly formed triboxide is composed of a spinel of Fe and Cr oxide, the amount of which is similar in the two analyzed samples. The triboxide has the same chemical composition as that at room temperature when the temperature is increased to 200 °C, with the addition of Ni-Fe oxides that were more common in the forged sample than the 3D printed one ().
Table 5. Raman spectra summary of Fig. 8a.

N°	Pos.	Assignation	Ref.
A	220	A1g	[28]
B	280	Eg	[28]
C	390	Eg	[28]
D	495	A1g	[28]
E	612	Eg	[28]
F	690	Eu (disorder)	[28]
Table 6. Raman spectra summary of Fig. 8b.

N°	Pos.	Assignation	Ref.
A	220	A1g	[28]
B	280	Eg	[28]
C	390	Eg	[28]
D	495	A1g	[28]
E	612	Eg	[28]
F	690	Eu (disorder)	[28]
G	339	Eg	[29]
H	490	A1g	[29]
I	590	A1g	[29]
L	700	A1g	[29]
Table 7. Raman spectra summary of Fig. 8c.

N°	Pos.	Assignation	Ref.
A	226	A1g	[30]
B	245	Eg	[30]
C	293	Eg	[30]
D	413	Eg	[30]
E	500	Eg	[30]
F	614	A1g	[30]
G	659	Eu (disorder)	[30]
H	220	A1g	[28]
I	280	Eg	[28]
J	390	Eg	[28]
K	495	A1g	[28]
L	612	Eg	[28]
M	690	Eu (disorder)	[28]
Table 8. Raman spectra summary of Fig. 8d.

N°	Pos.	Assignation	Ref.
A	226	A1g	[31]
B	245	Eg	[32]
C	293	Eg	[32]
D	413	Eg	[32]
E	500	Eg	[32]
F	614	A1g	[32]
G	659	Eu (disorder)	[32]
H	220	A1g	[33]
I	280	Eg	[33]
J	390	Eg	[34]
K	495	A1g	[34]
L	612	Eg	[34]
M	690	Eu (disorder)	[31]
The intensity of the Raman spectra for the specimen tested at 200 °C is higher than the spectra of the specimens tested at room temperature. This is in accordance with the higher amount of triboxide observed using SEM. The higher intensity levels observed for the forged material suggest the presence of coarse and thicker triboxides in comparison with the 3D printed specimens.
Concerning the triboxide grain size, three spectroscopic clues suggest that the grain size of the SLM material is smaller than its correspondent forged counterpart: the band position at about 280 cm−1 and related to the Eg vibrational mode of hematite is shifted to higher values, while the full-width half-maximum values are larger. Both parameters are inversely proportional to the average size of the grains [28]. Additionally, a linear correlation between the intensity of the band located at about 390 cm−1 and the size of the grains was postulated by Chernyshova et al. [35], which can also be observed in Fig. 10, further supporting the hypothesis.
Fig. 10
Download: Download high-res image (253KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 10. Distribution of the band position of band B of hematite as a function of the full width at half maximum (FWHM). ((horizontal) at the end of the test. The correspondent relative intensity for the band at 390 cm−1 is also shown outside the relative circle.

However, at 400 °C no significant difference can be seen between the spectra of the two types of materials, and the oxide was composed of a mixture of hematite and Fe-Cr oxide spinel. Although the peaks in the spectra of the two types of materials are similar, the 3D printed sample still exhibits spectra with a lower intensity, probably because of the finer grain size and thickness of the triboxides as compared to the forged material. Only hematite was detected outside the wear track, which was the result of the oxidation of the material in the presence of air.
As the temperature is increased to 600 °C, the triboxides become more complex and are composed of hematite, Ni-Fe-Cr oxide (spinel), and Mn-Cr-Fe oxide (spinel). An oxide composed of hematite and cromia was also detected outside the wear track. The Raman spectra intensity of the 3D printed materials is again lower than that of the forged materials. In general, the triboxides that formed on the 3D printed materials were similar to those observed on the forged sample, but were finer and thinner.
The tribolayer was further characterized by analyzing the thickness and strain of the hardened/recrystallized layer with those of the triboxide layer as a function of temperature (Fig. 11). It was observed from analyzation of the graph describing the thickness of the triboxide that the oxide increases monotonically as a function of temperature. Slight differences can be observed in the forged material as compared to the SLM material. The only difference that was highlighted by the Raman measurement is the size of the oxide grains, which are finer in the 3D printed material. However, there were obvious differences between the strain hardened/recrystallized layer in the 3D printed material and the forged material. In the forged material this layer presents as a deep, plastically deformed layer, in which the thickness is a decreasing function of temperature. The deeper plastically deformed layer does depend strongly on the mechanical properties of the material, i.e. on the hardness. In the case of the 3D printed material, the occurrence of these dislocations is hindered by the presence of the fine dispersion of ferrite in the austenite, where the ferrite acts as a straightener in the austenitic phase, in a similar manner to a deformable particle. The decrease in the strain hardened/recrystallized layer that occurs as the temperature is increased can be explained by the increase in the triboxide thickness and by the change to the triboxide microstructure. By increasing the thickness of the triboxide, it becomes able to bear a higher Hertzian load. Secondly, the changes in the triboxide microstructure affect its mechanical properties. In particular, the finer grained triboxides of the 3D printed material are more wear resistant than the forged triboxides. This is in accordance with the stress distribution of the material underneath, which is higher in the forged material than the samples that were additively manufactured.
Fig. 11
Download: Download high-res image (307KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 11. Characterization of the tribolayer: the analysis of the strain hardened/recrystallized layer and the thickness of the triboxide as a function of temperature.

A detailed analysis of the strain hardened layer using EBSD is shown in Fig. 12. In this case, EBSD maps were performed on the material beneath the wear track in order to detect possible recrystallized areas that are not visible in SEM analysis.
Fig. 12
Download: Download high-res image (2MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 12. EBSD maps of the strain hardened/recrystallized layer in selected samples.

At low temperatures the EBSD maps show the presence of a heavily strain-hardened layer, which is thicker in the forged material than the 3D printed sample. In addition, the plastic deformation observed in the area beneath the wear track is more intense in the forged material, where the tribolayer begins to react by forming a very thin recrystallized layer that is close to the contact surface. This thin layer was likely produced by the heat that was produced by friction with the contact region, which contributed to the increase in temperature that reached the point at which recrystallization occurs.
Both samples present a recrystallization at the same intensity at 600 °C, but the forged material also shows a deep strain-hardened layer in the underlying material. Thus, at 600 °C, the combination of critical plastic deformation with a critical temperature led to a dynamic recrystallization of the material. The differences between the 3D printed and forged material are linked to the underlying strain-hardened layer that is deeper and more strongly deformed in the forged material.
The microhardness profiles beneath the wear track are presented for all materials tested in Fig. 13.
Fig. 13
Download: Download high-res image (83KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 13. Profiles of the microhardness beneath the wear track in the tested samples.

In this case, the additively manufactured samples show an increase in hardness that is initially localized to points close to the surface, while a deeper layer in the forged material in which the hardness varies corresponds to the results obtained from microstructural characterization. A stable hardness in the range of 240 HV was measured in the bulk of the 3D printed material for samples tested up to 400 °C [16]. Above this temperature, a slight decrease in the hardness was observed, as reported by other authors. On the other hand, no significant variation in the hardness was detected in the forged material. 3D printed materials are therefore more prone to changes as a result heating, also as reported by other authors [16].
4. Conclusions
This study was aimed at determining the tribological behavior of 3D printed AISI 316L steel at very high Hertzian loads, as compared to forged steel. The microstructure and the changes in the microstructure of the material when stressed with Hertzian loads similar to those affecting working conditions in the steel industry were analyzed carefully.
The results obtained suggest that the 3D printed material exhibits a higher wear resistance compared to the forged material, which is basically due to the higher hardness of the 3D printed material. This statement is supported by the microstructural characterization that highlights the presence of a nano-structured cellular organization of austenite and ferrite phases in the printed material, which is responsible for the enhanced mechanical properties of this material. The increase in hardness implies that the 3D printed material has a higher resistance to wear compared with the forged material at all the temperatures tested, although the difference decreases as the temperature is increased to 600 °C. This behavior is due to the formation of a triboxide layer that has the same composition in both the 3D printed and forged materials. The only difference was related to the thickness and grain size of the triboxide, which were lower in the 3D printed specimens. In particular, the finer grain size of the oxide increased the local mechanical resistance of the oxide and thus reduced the strain hardened/recrystallized layer in the underlying material. As a consequence, also the wear was reduced. At the temperatures used for this experiment it was observed that both the 3D printed material and the forged material are prone to recrystallization. Therefore, 3D printed AISI 316L may be successfully applied in advanced engineering applications that require complex geometries combined with high mechanical performance.