Abstract
The rapid global expansion of electric vehicles and energy storage industries necessitates understanding lithium-ion battery performance under unconventional conditions, such as low temperature. This study investigates long-term capacity degradation of lithium-ion batteries after low temperature exposure subjected to various C-rate cycles. Findings reveal that low temperature exposure accelerates capacity degradation, especially with increased C-rates or longer exposure durations. A distinctive sunken region appears on the NMC H-stage peak as cycling progresses after low temperature exposure, indicating NMC particle damage and serving as a predictive signal for identifying low temperature exposure batteries. Electrochemical analyses and invasive detection indicate that low temperature exposure causes NMC particle cracking, leading to dead lithium generation. This dead lithium deposits on electrode surfaces, as well as the overconsumption of electrolyte, inhibiting reactions and reducing capacity. Additionally, dead lithium accumulates on separators, impeding ion transport and further accelerating capacity loss. NMC particle cracks develop faster after low temperature exposure due to stress concentration at internal slits. This stress concentration causes the maximum stress within the NMC particles to exceed tensile stress limits, resulting in rapid crack propagation. The internal cracks become larger with prolonged low temperature exposure, causing greater stress concentration and leading to faster crack propagation. Based on these insights, strategies from existing literature are discussed to mitigate the adverse impacts of low temperature exposure on lithium-ion battery performance and enhance the reliability and longevity of lithium-ion battery in extreme conditions.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Lithium-ion batteryLow temperature exposureCapacity degradationElectrode damageNMC particle
1. Introduction
The rapid advancement of globalization has significantly increased energy demand, thereby accelerating the growth of new energy sources. Despite this, the utilization of these new energy sources is constrained by their heterogeneous storage capabilities. Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), a highly successful energy storage equipment, are now extensively used across industries, ranging from energy storage systems to electric vehicles. The requirement for stable operation of energy storage devices and electric vehicles under extreme conditions has risen due to effective marketing strategies. These extreme conditions include preloading force [1], overcharging [2], and high/low temperatures [3], [4]. At low temperatures, the performance metrics of lithium-ion batteries, such as capacity, output power, and cycle life, deteriorate significantly. Studies indicate that in environments where temperatures fall below −40°C, battery capacity can plummet to 12 % of its nominal value [5]. Notably, 38 % of China’s territory experiences temperatures below −20°C [6], highlighting the prevalence of low temperature challenges for batteries. To address these issues, thermal management systems have been implemented to heat batteries and restore their performance. However, these systems add extra weight to vehicles and lead to uneven temperature distribution within the battery pack [7]. This uneven distribution can harm the uniformity of battery performance and complicate battery management systems. Therefore, it is imperative to thoroughly understand the mechanisms and impacts of low temperature exposure on lithium-ion batteries. Such knowledge is crucial for advancing battery materials, optimizing charging and discharging protocols, and enhancing battery management system principles.
The low temperature performance and aging of batteries have been subjects of study for decades. In 1990, Chang et al. [8] discovered that lead/acid cells could not be fully charged at temperatures below −40°C. Smart et al. [9] examined the performance of lithium-ion batteries used in NASA's Mars 2001 Lander, finding that both capacity and cycle life were significantly reduced at low temperatures compared to room temperature. Du et al. [10] compared the aging rates at different temperatures, quantifying the capacity fade and aging acceleration under low temperatures at 43 % and 25 %, respectively. Li et al. [11] studied the effects of various charge rates and temperatures on battery performance, concluding that a decrease in operating temperature combined with an increase in charge rate accelerated the aging process. Liu et al. [12] conducted a follow-up experiment involving low temperature and high temperature cycles, revealing that the cycle life degradation experienced at low temperatures is irreversible.
Previous studies have proposed several experimental approaches to analyze battery capacity fade. Techniques such as X-ray scanning [13], X-ray diffraction (XRD) [14], and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) [15] have been utilized to study the degradation of individual electrodes. Additionally, in situ non-invasive technologies, including Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) [16] and differential voltage/capacity curves [17], [18], [19], have been employed to semi-quantitatively analyze the aging mechanisms of batteries. The differential voltage curve, considered a method for predicting internal battery damage [20], was used by Wu et al. [21] to identify damaged components in batteries subjected to low temperature cycling, revealing cathode damage due to lithium deposition. This finding was confirmed by Kong et al. [22], who disassembled batteries cycled at low temperatures and observed lithium deposits on the cathode surface. Despite their high accuracy, these methods are not suitable for the routine evaluation of energy storage batteries due to their invasive nature and the need for specialized instruments. To address this, data-driven models have been introduced to diagnose and predict the impact of low temperature cycling on batteries [23], [24], facilitating the evaluation of battery management systems without compromising the battery structure.
In addition to low temperature cycling, batteries also experience low temperature exposure. Unlike low temperature cycling, low temperature exposure involves batteries experiencing a low temperature period without activity, resuming cycling at room temperature. While some researchers have suggested that the effects of low temperature exposure can be negligible [25], Dubarry et al. [26] found that temperature history significantly impacts battery degradation, with more pronounced effects than state of charge (SOC), particularly under low SOC conditions. In a further study, Li et al. [27] confirmed that low temperature exposure leads to half-cell faster degradation. Using full-field transmission X-ray microscopy (TXM) and nano-resolution X-ray phase-contrast nano-holo-tomography, they observed that low temperature exposure caused cracking and detachment of cathode particles. Additionally, the composite electrode materials underwent deformation, causing the cathode particles to detach from the carbon binder domains of the cathode. Consequently, the battery aging rate accelerated following low temperature exposure.
However, until now, the accelerated aging mechanism of low temperature exposure cells and the relationship between cathode particle cracking and capacity accelerated degradation remained unexplored. In this study, the influence of low temperature exposure on batteries under different cycling rates and the influence of the duration of low temperature exposure were investigated and quantified. Based on the cycling data obtained from the long-term cycling of these batteries, electrochemical analyses were performed to complete semi-quantitative analysis of the damage in the internal battery components during the cycling. Upon completion of long-term cycling, macroscopic and microscopic morphological changes in battery components were detected to correlate with electrochemical test results and elucidate the accelerated aging mechanism of batteries exposed to low temperatures. Finally, a single-particle simulation was conducted to explain the mechanism by which low temperature exposure affects the degradation behavior of NMC particles within the battery. The insights gained could inform strategies to mitigate these adverse effects, enhancing the reliability and longevity of lithium-ion battery in extreme conditions.
2. Methodology
2.1. Battery Sample and Preparation
A type of cylindrical 18650 Li-ion batteries, featuring an NMC811 cathode and a silicon-graphite anode, was used for the subsequent experiments, aligning with the trend toward high energy density batteries. The nominal capacity and voltage are 3.1 Ah and 3.7 V, respectively. Activation cycles were performed to ensure the batteries reached a stable operational state. A test cell was cycled five times at 1C to determine the necessary number of activation cycles, and this number was then applied to all batteries to stabilize their capacity before further testing. Battery inconsistency, which can arise during production [28], leads to differences in initial performance and can result in significant operational variations [29]. To ensure consistency, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was employed. All charging and discharging operations were conducted in a thermostatic box maintained at 25 °C to eliminate the influence of temperature fluctuations.
The operation program, as shown in Fig. 1(a), was established as follows: after the initial cycling and confirmation of consistency, an open-circuit voltage (OCV) test was performed to establish a baseline for the subsequent semi-quantitative battery degradation analysis. The cycling speed for the OCV test was set to C/25 to accurately measure the open-circuit voltage. Ten cycles were conducted in a normal cycle, with cycling rates for different cells set at 0.5C, 1C, and 2C, respectively. Just after the end of each normal cycle, a real capacity test cycle was conducted to determine the actual capacity of the battery in its current state. Additionally, an OCV test cycle was performed every three normal cycles to evaluate the internal aging state of the battery. A large cycle, consisting of three normal cycles, three real capacity test cycles, and an OCV test cycle, was repeated four times to monitor the battery's long-term capacity degradation performance. After each charge and discharge process, the battery was allowed to rest for a few minutes to stabilize the voltage. An extra OCV test cycle was included after the low temperature exposure, conducted after the completion of the first large cycle. It should be noted that during the low-temperature exposure, the battery was in a fully charged state, consistent with real-life scenarios. Low temperature exposure (LTE) was achieved by placing the batteries in a thermostatic box at −20 °C for a specified period, followed by placing them in a thermostatic box at 25 °C to return them to room temperature. The detailed parameters of these cycles are listed in Table S1.

Download: Download high-res image (454KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Schematic of battery cycling and electrochemical test (a) The scheme of battery cycling experiment (b) The characteristic peak movement in differential voltage curves (c) Open circuit potential of full cell and half cell (d) Theoretic scheme of OCV curve fitting.

2.2. Electro-chemical detection
The electro-chemical detection comprises two distinct components: differential voltage curve analysis and OCV curve fitting analysis. During the charge or discharge process, the battery material would undergo phase transitions, which would be captured as peaks or troughs in the differential voltage curve. The previous literature has already analyzed the differential voltage curve of NMC 811 battery and has identified the five peaks' aging change with the inner reaction behind them [30], which was shown in Fig. 1(b). If a peak shifts to a lower voltage, it suggests that the lithium intercalation into the electrode material is occurring at a lower voltage, possibly due to the degradation of the material and the loss of active sites. Additionally, lithium plating on the anode can cause a drop in voltage, leading to a similar leftward shift in the peaks. Hence, through exact differential voltage curves' peak movement, the degradation of battery material could be qualitatively analyzed. For differential voltage curve analysis, data obtained from the constant current (CC) discharge process of the capacity test cycle were used. As suggested by Julius et al. [30], 2000 points were isometrically selected from the discharge data of the OCV test cycles to avoid the effects of voltage disturbances and to maintain the accuracy of the characteristic peaks.
Differential voltage curve analysis is a qualitative method for analyzing the degradation of different battery assemblies. In contrast, OCV curve fitting is a semi-quantitative method for assessing battery degradation. This model for quantifying the degradation sources and their extent was developed by Dubarry [31]. The OCV data obtained from the full-cell OCV test has been confirmed to be the differential of the half-cell data [32], as illustrated in the function below and in Fig. 1(c):
(1)
The 
, 
 and 
 values presented below represent the open circuit potential (OCP) of full cell, cathode, and anode respectively at specific SOC values. As illustrated in Fig. 1(d), the 
 and 
 were not directly equal. On the contrary, by a series of linearly scale and shift, Eq. (1) can be achieved at the same SOC axis. The convert of 
 and 
 can be described by the following equation:
(2)
Where, 
 and 
 represent the linear scaling factors while 
 and 
 are the shift of the OCP curve. In this model, the start point of the half-cell OCP curve is the zero point of electrode SOC, at which point the anode was at the delithiated state and cathode was at the lithiated state. By rearranging Eq. (2), it is possible to calculate the electrode SOC in terms of the full cell SOC, as shown in Eq. (3):
(3)
As demonstrated in previous studies, the shape of the half-cell open-circuit potential (OCP) curve remains consistent throughout the aging process. This consistency allows for the analysis of the full-cell open-circuit voltage (OCV) curve based on the baseline of the electrode OCP curve and the alignment parameters. The alignment parameters, calculated in advance, can be used to estimate the lithium inventory in the full cell and the remaining capacity of the single electrode within the full cell.
Regarding the aging cathode, the remaining capacity of the aging cathode is equal to the full cathode capacity multiplied by the scaling factor αcat. The loss of cathode active materials (LAMcat) can be described by the following equation:
(4)
Ccat,ini represents the initial capacity of the battery cathode, while Ccat denotes the capacity of the battery cathode in its calculation state. Similarly, the loss of anode active materials (LAMan) can be described by the following equation:
(5)
2.3. Invasive detection
Following the completion of the cycling test, the batteries were disassembled in an argon-filled glovebox (Super 1711, Mikrouna) to examine changes in the surface morphology of the electrodes, as the battery materials, being sensitive to air, required a controlled environment [33]. The samples were then washed with dimethyl carbonate (DMC) three times and dried to remove organic solvents from the electrode surface. Subsequently, the samples were examined using a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Sigma 300, Zeiss) to observe any micro-morphological changes on the electrode surface. In addition, Energy-Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) and X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) were performed to analyze the elemental distribution and the types of materials present on the surfaces of the battery components.
2.4. Simulation of particle stress
The initiation of NMC particle cracking occurs during the early stages of long-term cycling, when the Cathode Electrolyte Interphase (CEI) still maintains its integrity. Due to the protective function of the CEI, external factors such as the electrolyte and neighboring particles have minimal influence on the particle at this stage. Therefore, our analysis focused solely on the internal stress caused by lithium-ion intercalation reactions to model the development of inner slits. This approach allowed us to effectively analyze the stress distribution and crack formation while reasonably simplifying the model. The simulation of particle stress was conducted using COMSOL Multiphysics. During the discharge process, lithium ions intercalate into the NMC811 particle, and the diffusion of lithium into the NMC811 particles creates a concentration gradient profile, resulting in a stress field in the NMC811 phase. In this study, it was assumed that there is only a single cubic phase of LixNi0.8Mn0.1Co0.1O2 in an NMC811 particle, with x ranging from 0 to 1. The change in particle volume was attributed to the intercalation and extraction of lithium ions within the framework of LixNi0.8Mn0.1Co0.1O2. During the simulation process, the charge and discharge processes were activated only when x ranged from 0 to 1, to prevent the onset of Jahn-Teller distortion. The simulation assumed that the lattice constants of the material changed linearly with the number of ions inserted, allowing the calculation of lithium intercalation-induced stress during cycling using an analogy to thermal stress.
The diffusion of Li-ion was solved within the solid mechanics field. In the multi-physical field, the diffusion flux (J) is defined by the following equation:
(6)
Here, D represents the diffusion coefficient, 
 is the concentration gradient of lithium-ions, 
 is the partial molar volume, and 
 is the gradient of hydrostatic stress. In addition, 
 is the gas constant while 
 represents the absolute temperature.
By combining Eq. (7) with the mass transfer equation of 
, the following equation could be determined:
(7)
The initial condition for this equation is 
, and as the battery’s charge/discharge current is constant, the boundary condition could be expressed as following:
(8)
Where, the 
 is the charge and discharge current and 
 is the Faraday constant. As the stress–strain relationship in this problem is similar to the thermal stresses, it’s relationship with the existing concentration of lithium-ions could be expressed as follows:
(9)
The 
 and 
 are, respectively, the strain and stress components. 
 is the Young’s modulus, 
 is the Poisson’s rate and 
 is the Kronecker delta. 
 is the change in lithium concentration relative to initial unstressed value. The last term of Eq 10 represents the intercalation stress.
For a crack within a single particle, the maximum principal tensile stress criterion is applied to determine the location and moment of damage. Once the stress in a specific cell exceeds the maximum principal tensile stress of an NMC811 particle, damage is recognized to have occurred in the particle. According to Joe’s experimental results [34], the maximum principal tensile stress of an NMC811 particle is 98 MPa. As the maximum stress in NMC particles typically occurs during the charge process, only the charging process was simulated in this study. According to the SEM results of adopted batteries’ cathode surface, the average particle diameter is 9 µm, and other properties used in this simulation are listed in Table S2.
In this simulation study, only one-eighth of an NMC811 particle was modeled and simulated to reduce the computational load.
As is confirmed by Based on the in-situ TXM images of real NMC particles captured by Li et al. [27], small slits caused by low temperature exposure (LTE) were found to be randomly located within the particles and enlarged with increased LTE duration, as shown in Fig. 2(a). In this work, the NMC particle inner slits caused by LTE was confirmed to dominate the degradation process of NMC particle. Hence, in this study, only slits caused by LTE were taken into consideration. To represent this phenomenon, six simplified models were created to depict the outer slit, intermediate slit, and inner slit, each caused by LTE, as shown in Fig. 2(b). The geometric sizes of these particles are detailed in Table S3. In the simulation, a constant current was applied to the outer face of the model to simulate the constant current charge process, while the other face was set as a symmetrical wall with no diffusion and displacement.

Download: Download high-res image (352KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Modeling of NMC 811 particle after LTE (a) Real NMC 811 particles [27] after LTE with their boundary (b) NMC 811 particle simulation geometry models.

3. Results and discussion
3.1. Capacity degradation behavior of batteries
Battery consistency was validated through activation cycling and selection processes. The validation results, presented in the Supplementary Material, led to the selection of 21 batteries for subsequent experiments. As shown in Fig S1(a), the number of activation cycles required for full battery capacity activation was determined to be 3. The degradation behaviors of batteries under different conditions are illustrated in Fig. 3. After each large cycle, the batteries exhibited a capacity recovery, a phenomenon that became more pronounced with an increase in the cycling C-rate. A low C-rate allows for the relaxation of electrode materials and recovery of electrolyte function, leading to a temporary recovery of battery capacity [35]. As the charge rate increased, the degradation also accelerated. For batteries without low temperature exposure (LTE), the degradation rate was found to be 4 % and 148 % higher when charged and discharged at 1C and 2C, respectively, compared to 0.5C. This discrepancy can be attributed to several factors, including lithium-ion plating, electrode stress, and electrolyte decomposition, as observed in previous studies [36].

Download: Download high-res image (596KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Long-term degradation behavior of cells under different conditions (a) Long-term cycle degradation of cells under different conditions (b) Real capacity test results with the degradation speed.

The impact of low temperature exposure also exhibited variability with changes in the charge and discharge rates. For the normal cell charged and discharged at a 0.5C rate, the degradation initially operated a high speed but then slowed with the increase in cycle number. This phenomenon is attributed to the reorganization of the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) and CEI [37], [38]. Both issues stem from compatibility problems between the electrode materials and electrolytes, necessitating the reconstruction of the reaction interface. The more pronounced effect at a 0.5C cycling rate, as identified by Zhu et al. [39], was due to increased degradation mechanisms, such as lithium plating and the loss of active materials. Lithium plating is particularly sensitive to the charge rate, while the loss of active materials is sensitive to the discharge rate. As the cycling rate increases, the impact of SEI and CEI reorganization becomes less significant compared to lower cycling rates.
After LTE, the degradation of 0.5C LTE cells accelerated during the first 10 cycles post-exposure. At cycle 40, both the 24-hour LTE and 48-hour LTE cells experienced a capacity drop, with the 48-hour LTE cell experiencing a greater reduction than the 24-hour LTE cell. Throughout the remaining cycles, the degradation rate of the 24-hour LTE cell slowed and eventually aligned with that of a normal cell. In contrast, the 48-hour LTE cell's degradation rate did not decrease as significantly as 24-hours LTE cell and ceased decreasing when it matched that of the normal cell. Consequently, a gap remained in the degree of degradation between the 48-hour LTE cell and the normal cell. The degradation rate, calculated based on real capacity test results, revealed that the 48-hour LTE cell degraded 2 % faster than the normal cell at a 0.5C charge and discharge rate.
The degradation behavior of the 1C normal cell was similar to that of the 0.5C normal cell, with the degradation rate being approximately 2 % higher. For the LTE cells under 1C cycling, degradation accelerated immediately after the low temperature exposure. At the start of cycle 80, the 48-hour LTE cell experienced a further decline in performance. As a result, the real capacity test showed that, compared to the normal cell, the 24-hour LTE and 48-hour LTE cells increased the degradation rate by 1.92 % and 5.77 %, respectively. Additionally, the 48-hour LTE cell exhibited an accelerated degradation rate in the last 20 cycles, according to the real capacity test results.
The degradation behavior of the 2C normal cell was unique, with the degradation rate remaining stable until the final 30 cycles, where it then accelerated. Both LTE cells under 2C cycling condition exhibited an increase in degradation rate following low temperature exposure. At the beginning of cycle 61, the capacity of the 48-hour LTE cell experienced a sudden drop, which continued until cycle 70. In cycle 71, the capacity returned to its normal value, and the degradation continued. This was confirmed by the real capacity test results, showing a sudden large drop in cycle 70′s real capacity. It is hypothesized that the cell’s SEI should be blame to this phenomenon. The SEI protects the electrode material and ensures efficient ion transfer. Low C-rate cycling decreases the thickness of the SEI [40]. Hence, after the OCV test, the SEI became thin and fragile, breaking under the rapid ion transfer during high-rate cycling. When the SEI is compromised, it becomes unstable and uneven at high cycling rates, significantly increasing resistance at the electrode–electrolyte interface and leading to a decrease in capacity [41], which was observed. However, during low C-rate cycling, such as in capacity test cycles, the SEI can reform and become smoother and more complete [42], contributing to capacity recovery observed in the capacity test cycles after cycle 70. Finally, the degradation rate increased by 22.58 % and 41.53 % for the 24-hour LTE and 48-hour LTE cells, respectively, compared to the 2C normal cell.
3.2. Electro-chemical detection
The differential voltage curves from the OCV test results are displayed in Fig. 4. Throughout the aging cycles, all electrochemical characteristic peaks shifted, indicating physical changes within the battery's internal components. It is noteworthy that several characteristic peaks appeared when the state of charge (SOC) ranged from 0 to 0.2. Previous literature typically identifies a single characteristic peak in this SOC range as indicative of a silicon phase change [43]. The presence of multiple peaks may result from varying sizes of silicon particles in the silicon-graphite mixture, as the volumetric strain of silicon correlates with particle size. With the increase in cycling rate, the movement of characteristic peaks became more pronounced, consistent with changes in degradation levels. Additionally, as the aging process progressed, the differential voltage curve became less smooth due to inhomogeneous diffusion and transport of lithium ions in the electrodes, coinciding with capacity degradation [44].

Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Differential voltage curves of cells at various cycling rates and exposure durations (a)-(c) results of 2C cycling cells after different exposure time (d)-(f) results of 1C cycling cells after different exposure time (g)-(i) results of 0.5C cycling cells after different exposure time.

For the 0.5C cycling cells, the results shown in Fig. 4(g) to 4(i) indicate minimal internal characteristic changes after LTE, as the characteristic peak changes were very similar, consistent with the capacity degradation results. Notably, a small sunken region developed on the NMC H2 stage peak (SOC ranging from 0.65 to 0.85) of the 48-hour LTE cell, suggesting potential damage to the NMC particles, which became more significant with cycling progress. For the 1C cycling cells shown in Fig. 4(d) to 4(f), the characteristic peaks exhibited varying changes. In the NMC-M stage peak (SOC ranging from 0.3 to 0.5), the cells showed rapid changes in peak height and position after LTE, which persisted into subsequent cycles, particularly for the 48-hour LTE cell, indicating potential damage to the NMC particles. Additionally, changes were observed in the graphite stage 2 (SOC ranging from 0.5 to 0.7), where LTE cells displayed lower peak values compared to normal cells, indicating damage to the cathode's graphite. The flattened graphite stage 2 peak in the 48-hour LTE cell's curve further corroborates this damage. Similar to the 0.5C results, a sunken region also grew on the NMC H-stage peak of the 48-hour LTE cell's curves, and compared to the sunken region on the 0.5C 48-hour LTE cell, it was deeper, indicating more severe damage to the NMC particles. For 2C cycling cells, the curve changes were more pronounced, with disappearance and significant shifts in characteristic peaks, consistent with the observed capacity degradation. Compared with the normal cell, the characteristic peak of graphite stage was completely absent and the sunken region grew on the NMC H-stage peak with a rapid speed for all LTE cells, which indicated that both the cathode and anode were seriously damaged after LTE under 2C cycling condition. Compared with 1C cycling cells undergoing LTE, the sunken region of LTE cells under 2C cycling became much more significant as it almost split the NMC H-peak into two peaks.
As the sunken region grew on the differential curves of almost all LTE cells, differential curves calculated from the OCV test results of cells undergoing 120 cycles were used for analysis. The sunken regions on the NMC H-stage peak of all the LTE cells grew significant along with the cycling process. The angle of the sunken region (αS) was defined to evaluate the growth degree of the sunken region on the NMC H-stage peak, as labeled in the subplots shown in Fig. 4. It was determined that αS decreased with increasing LTE time and cycling rate, while it remained almost the same and larger than 180° for normal cells under different cycling rates. Hence, the sunken region occurring on the NMC H-stage peak could also serve as an indicator for battery management systems to predict if the cell has undergone LTE.
The fitting results of the OCV curves from the cycling test are shown in Fig S2, and all the curves were well-fitted. Based on the parameters used to generate the fitted OCV curves from the electrode OCP curves, a semi-quantitative analysis of active material loss in the cathode and anode was conducted, with the results presented in Fig. 5. The degradation degree of the 0.5C normal cell was set as the baseline. The degradation degree rates of other cells after 120 cycles were compared to this baseline and are indicated in the figure.

Download: Download high-res image (771KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. OCV curve analysis for cells at different cycling rates and exposure durations (a)-(c) results of 2C cycling cells under different exposure time (d)-(f) results of 1C cycling cells under different exposure time (g)-(i) results of 0.5C cycling cells under different exposure time.

For the 0.5C cycling cells, the degradation degree of the normal cell decreased according to the 30–1 OCV test, primarily due to a reduction in loss of cathode active materials (LAMcat), aligning with the previously mentioned capacity recovery. However, LAMcat of the LTE cell increased after LTE for the 48-hour LTE cell, indicating that the 48-hour LTE affected the active materials in the cathode. Over the next 30 cycles post-LTE, both the cells’ capacity degradation rate and the rate of increase in LAMcat accelerated. In subsequent cycles, the increase in LAMcat for LTE cells slowed down, allowing the total degradation degree of the LTE cell to return to that of the normal cell. Ultimately, both the LAMcat and total degradation degree of the 24-hour LTE cell returned to normal levels. In contrast, the 48-hour LTE cell maintained a 1 % higher degradation degree in LAMcat, contributing to its accelerated capacity degradation.
The normal 1C cycling cell also exhibited capacity recovery between OCV cycle 30 and OCV cycle 30–1. However, its degradation rate was slightly faster than that of the 0.5C normal cell. Similarly to the 0.5C results, the 24-hour LTE cell’s LAMcat accelerated over the next 30 cycles after LTE and then gradually decreased to match the normal cell’s LAMcat level, slightly accelerating overall capacity degradation compared to the normal cell. In contrast, the increase in LAMcat for the 48-hour LTE cell remained steady over the following 60 cycles after LTE, resulting in a total cell capacity degradation rate about 5 % faster than that of the 1C normal cell. Unlike the 0.5C results, loss of cathode active materials (LAMan) was slightly accelerated after LTE, which indicated that both the cathode and anode were damaged at this situation. It is noteworthy that the acceleration of LAMan occurred later than the acceleration of LAMcat.
The capacity degradation of the 2C cycling normal cell was much faster than that of the 0.5C or 1C cycling normal cells, and this was reflected in the increased speeds of LAMan and LAMcat. It was observed that although the total degradation degree remained between LAMan and LAMcat, the increase in LAMan was larger than that of LAMcat, and both were smaller than the increase in total degradation except for the 24-hour LTE cell, which might be disturbed by voltage fluctuation. After LTE, both the 24-hour LTE cell and the 48-hour LTE cell showed accelerated increases in LAMan and LAMcat. Contrary to the 0.5C and 1C results, the increased speed of LAMan and LAMcat continued to accelerate during subsequent cycling, leading to faster overall cell degradation. Additionally, similar to the 1C results, the acceleration of LAMan occurred after the acceleration of LAMcat.
The observed phenomena indicate that the faster capacity degradation of LTE cells can be attributed to the accelerated degradation of active materials in both the cathode and anode. As the cycling rate increased, the loss of active materials in both electrodes also accelerated, suggesting that the damage to the active materials in both the cathode and anode is associated with the cycling conditions. At the 2C cycling condition, the increased speed of LAMcat was slower than LAMan, and the increase in both was slower than the total degradation, indicating that other factors influenced the overall degradation rate. Since the rate of cathode active material degradation accelerated before that of anode active material degradation in all LTE cells' cycling lives, there is clearly a linkage between the loss of active materials in the cathode and anode. This linkage, under certain conditions, could lead to additional degradation within the battery. This relationship should be investigated further.
3.3. Invasive detection
The battery disassembly results are depicted in Fig. 6(a), with more detailed information available in Fig S3. The results reveal that the anode of the fresh cell was almost black and easily separated from the separator. Under 0.5C and 1C conditions, there were negligible changes on the anode surfaces of both the normal and LTE cells. Only the 48-hour LTE cell under 1C cycling exhibited a slightly paler anode surface, consistent with the slight increase in its LAMan compared to the normal cell. When the cycling condition increased to 2C, the anode surface color changed from black to brown, corresponding to a significant increase in LAMan. For the 24-hour and 48-hour LTE cells, black and white mixed substances were found on the anode surface, likely representing “dead lithium” and the reaction products of the electrolyte with metallic lithium. Separating the anode from the separator was challenging, as if the separator had adhered to the anode, which was caused by the decrease in electrolyte and the increase of reaction products of the electrolyte with metallic lithium [45]. The separator of the fresh cell was clean and white. For the 0.5C and 1C cycling cells, the separators remained clean. However, unlike the normal cell, there were some small black spots on the LTE cells' separators, with these spots found across most areas of the separator from the 48-hour LTE cell. The separator of the 2C cycling normal cell remained clean, while there were many black marks covering the surface of the 2C cycling LTE cells' separators. These marks likely originated from the cathode and may be a mixture of dead lithium and the reaction products of the electrolyte. With increased LTE time, the black materials covered more of the LTE cell separator surface and even became thicker. The fresh cell’s cathode was black and glossy. After cycling, both the normal cells and LTE cells under the 0.5C and 1C cycling conditions showed minimal changes on the cathode surface. For the 2C cycling cells, the cathode surface turned gray, and there was a crack on the anode surface of the 48-hour LTE cell, indicating that the cathode material became brittle and was seriously damaged.

Download: Download high-res image (2MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Invasive detection results of batteries after long-term cycling (a) battery components assembling results (b) SEM results of batteries’ cathode morphology (c) SEM results of batteries’ anode morphology (d) SEM results of batteries’ cathode morphology (e) EDS results of batteries’ component surface.

Fig. 6(b) presents a collection of SEM results for the cathode surfaces. The SEM image of the fresh cell's cathode surface reveals a dense arrangement of NMC811 particles, which appear as complete spheres with rough surfaces. Under 0.5C cycling, the NMC particles preserved their original morphology; however, those in the 24-hour and 48-hour LTE cells exhibited small surface cracks that enlarged and extended inward with increased LTE duration. In normal cells under 1C cycling, the NMC particles retained their shape but developed rough, weathered surfaces. Compared to the 0.5C cycling cells, the NMC particles in the LTE cells under 1C cycling displayed larger surface cracks, potentially contributing to LAMcat compared to normal cells. The NMC particles in the 48-hour LTE cell showed extensive cracking, becoming flatter and fused, likely due to metallic lithium deposition and restructuring of the NMC particles. In the 2C cycling cells, the normal cell particles maintained their integrity without surface cracks, while those in the LTE cells became fragmented, exhibiting numerous small and several large cracks. In the 48-hour LTE cell, some NMC particles were completely broken into pieces. Additionally, the surface of NMC particles in LTE cells became extremely rough, with small particles forming on them, likely due to particle reconstruction during cycling, which may accelerate LAMcat. A high-magnification SEM image from 24-hour LTE cell under 2C cycling, shown in Fig. 6(b-ii), confirms the presence of small particles on the secondary NMC particles, likely representing deposited dead lithium.
Fig. 6(c) displays SEM results of anode surfaces from cells under various conditions. The surface featured large irregular particles and small spherical particles, identified as graphite and silicon, respectively, through EDS point scans (Fig S5). The fresh cell exhibited pristine particle shapes. In the 0.5C cycling results, graphite particles retained their original shape with rough edges, while silicon particles were mostly fragmented, correlating with the disappearance of the silicon phase peak in the differential voltage curve. As LTE duration increased, the edges of graphite particles became rougher. Unlike the 0.5C cycling cells, the anode surfaces of the 1C cycling cells appeared flatter. A zoomed-in view of the flat surface in Fig. 6(c-ii) reveals small particles identified as dead lithium deposits, with the area covered by dead lithium increasing with extended LTE time. The 2C cycling cells' anode surfaces were markedly different, nearly entirely covered with dead lithium. As LTE time increased, the dead lithium deposits on the anode surface became thicker and rougher. Zoomed-in views in Fig. 6(c-iii) and Fig. 6(c-iv) confirm these changes and the emergence of lithium dendrites.
From the separators’ SEM results shown in Fig. 6(d) and detailed in Fig S6, it was found that with the increase of low temperature exposure period or the cycling rate, more material deposited on the separator surface and the porosity of the separator also decreased. In addition, when the cycling rate turned to 2C, the deposed matter on the LTE cells’ surface even formed into a sedimentary layer, which indicated very high levels of deposition [46]. Some lithium dendrites were found on the separator surface of the 48 h LTE cell under 2C cycling, indicating a more serious deposition which was a signal of capacity higher degradation level.
EDS analysis was conducted on components from a fresh cell, a 2C normal cell, and a 2C 48-hour LTE cell to identify the deposited material, as shown in Fig. 6(e) and detailed in Fig S7. Lithium was not detected due to EDS limitations, which only detect elements heavier than carbon. On the fresh cell's anode surface, primarily composed of carbon and oxygen, carbon content decreased while oxygen and other nonmetals, such as F, increased, likely because of the deposition of electrolyte decomposition products. The separator surface of the 2C 48-hour LTE cell contained more metal elements, such as Ni, Co, and Mn, attributed to the reaction between transition metals and the electrolyte. Oxygen content also increased on the separator, further indicating deposition from electrolyte decomposition. The separator exhibited a much higher percentage of metal elements compared to the anode surface, suggesting that the reaction products between transition metals and the electrolyte were trapped on the separator, impeding the movement of metallic elements from the cathode to the anode. The fresh cathode surface was predominantly composed of metal elements, but after 2C normal cycling, the cathode surface showed increased carbon and oxygen due to electrolyte decomposition. In the 2C 48-hour LTE cell, the percentage of metal elements and oxygen increased, while carbon decreased, likely due to cathode particle cracking, which disrupted the electrolyte decomposition deposits and accelerated the deposition of reaction products between transition metals and the electrolyte.
Additionally, the XPS results of the separator surfaces, presented in Fig S8, were utilized to identify the components of the deposited matter while minimizing the influence of electrode materials. The deposited matter, observed on the surfaces of all high cycling rate LTE battery components, comprised both dead lithium and decomposition products from the electrolyte. Based on the literature referenced in Table S4, this matter includes metal oxides (Li2CO3, Li2O), metal fluorides (LiF, NiF2, CoF2), organic compounds (ethylene carbonate et al), and polymeric compounds (ROCO2Li et al).
Based upon the observations, it appears that cracking first occurs in the cathode's NMC particles, leading to the degradation of the NMC particle’s capacity [47] and creating voids that impede the passage of working ions, such as Li+ [48]. When Li+ ions fail to enter the NMC particles and integrate into the NMC lattice, they combine with free electrons to form metallic lithium, which reacts with the electrolyte and deposits on the battery's components [49]. On the anode side, this deposited metallic lithium reacts with the electrolyte, forming dead lithium, which hinders the intercalation of Li+ into the graphite, thereby reducing the anode’s capacity by blocking active material reactions [50]. Additionally, as a porous medium, the separator only allows substances smaller than its pore size to pass through. In LTE cells, the reaction products of metallic lithium with the electrolyte are larger than the separator’s pores, causing clogging [51]. This blockage partially cuts off the transfer of working ions, accelerating the deposition of metallic lithium, and further decreasing the capacity of both electrodes [52]. Due to the combined effect and interplay of these mechanisms, LTE cells degrade faster than normal cells. Although commercial batteries typically contain an excess of electrolyte, the rapid consumption of the electrolyte due to reactions with metallic lithium—exacerbated by high-speed ion transfer during fast cycling—eventually leads to electrolyte insufficiency. This insufficiency contributes to the difficulty in separating diaphragms and the rapid increase in capacity degradation observed in the final 30 cycles of 2C cycling cells. The whole mechanism was shown in Fig. 7.

Download: Download high-res image (693KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Mechanism of battery capacity degradation due to low temperature exposure.

3.4. Particle stress simulation result
Li's work [27] demonstrated that cracks in NMC 811 particles caused by low temperature exposure differ from those induced by cycling, which tend to be more severe in the particle center. Previous literature has established that NMC particles are composed of small NMC single crystals [53]. When exposed to low temperatures, these crystals shrink due to their thermal expansion properties. This shrinkage generates internal stress within the particle, leading to the initiation and growth of slits. As the duration of low temperature exposure increases, the recovery capacity of NMC crystals decreases, allowing more time for slit development. Consequently, longer periods of LTE result in larger internal slits within the particles. The particle stress simulation was established for figuring out the linkage between cathode degradation acceleration with the appearance of slits within the cathode particle.
Simulation validation, as detailed in the supplementary material, confirmed that adopting a 170,000-grid mesh for this study was sufficient and could accurately simulate the physical properties. Fig. 8 shows the results for pristine particles charged under 2C, 1C, and 0.5C currents. As illustrated in the subplots of Fig. 8, the maximum stress appeared on the outer wall of the particle, increased to a peak, and then decreased. This pattern occurred because, during the first stage of charging, the outer part of the particle had a higher concentration rate compared to the inner part, causing increasing pressure as Li-ion first de-intercalated in the outer part of the particle. After reaching the peak, the diffusion of Li-ion reduced the concentration gradient within the particle, thereby decreasing the intercalation stress caused by the concentration gradient. The maximum stress experienced by the particle is 230.66 MPa, 123.50 MPa, and 64.61 MPa under 2C, 1C, and 0.5C charge conditions, respectively. Given that the maximum principal tensile stress (σTS) for an NMC811 particle is 98 MPa, particles under 2C or 1C charging conditions are prone to crushing, which could contribute to the significant LAMcat observed under higher current rates.

Download: Download high-res image (143KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Stress distribution in pristine particles at various charging rates.

Fig. 9(a-1) indicates the maximum stress of particles with an outer slit under different charge rates. It can be found that with the outer slit, the maximum stress on any particle face increased by 6.10 %, 5.90 %, and 5.91 % for 2C, 1C, and 0.5C conditions, respectively. This increase was caused by stress concentration around the crack spreading to the particle surface, as shown in Fig. 9(b-i). The maximum stress around the slit reached 335 MPa, 180.37 MPa, and 94.62 MPa for 2C, 1C, and 0.5C conditions, respectively. Therefore, particles with an outer slit are more prone to developing cracks compared with pristine particle. It should be noted that with the outer slit, although the maximum stress of the particle under a 0.5C charge rate was lower than σTS, the real slit would be more irregular, which may lead to stress concentration and cause the maximum stress to exceed σTS. Hence, the degradation speeds of LTE cells under 0.5C cycling accelerated just after LTE. However, the outer slit is unlikely to develop into a crack that completely traverses the particle under 0.5C cycling condition, as it tends to be filled with a passivation layer after several cycles, leading to a deceleration in the capacity degradation rate of LTE cells under 0.5C cycling.

Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Stress distribution in particles with slits under different charging rates.

The simulation results for the intermediate slit, shown in Fig. 9(a-2), indicate that, compared to pristine particles, the maximum stress on the particle surface increased by −0.4 %, 1.2 %, and 0.8 % for 2C, 1C, and 0.5C cycling rates, respectively. This change was not as significant as that observed with the outer slit, due to the reduced influence of stress concentration around the slit. Additionally, with the initial slit positioned away from the particle surface, the maximum stress around the slit was also lower than that around the outer slit. Therefore, if there is only an intermediate slit in particles, it is unlikely for particles under a 0.5C condition to crack, and the cracking rate for particles under 1C and 2C conditions would also be slower. The inner slit simulation results, presented in Fig. 9(a-3), are similar to those of the intermediate slit. The maximum stress on the particle surface changed slightly, whereas the maximum stress on the slit surface increased by 4.54 %, 24.4 %, and 21.3 % for 2C, 1C, and 0.5C conditions, respectively. Furthermore, as depicted in Fig. 9(b-i), the stress concentration area around the inner slit was larger than that around the intermediate slit, caused by the larger concentration gradient around the inner slit. Consequently, the NMC particles on the cycled cathode surface after LTE would likely crack into two parts, as the slit expanded from the inside towards the surface.
The larger slit, representing extended LTE, exhibited a significant increase in maximum stress around the slit, as illustrated in Fig. 9(a-4), when the particle with an outer large slit was in the charging state. Consequently, the NMC particles after 48 h of LTE would be more severely cracked compared to those after 24 h of LTE. Additionally, for the middle large slit and inner larger slit, there was only a slight influence on the maximum stress of the particle surface, as shown in Fig. 9(a-5) and Fig. 9(a-6). Notably, the maximum stress around the particle surface decreased when the crack was in the middle of the particle. A possible reason is that the maximum stress position was on both sides of the middle slit. When the primary slit became larger and changed from spherical to ellipsoidal, the curvature on both sides decreased, which prevented stress concentration and led to a decrease in maximum stress around the slit.
Considering the results, it can be concluded that the primary slit caused by LTE would lead to the rapid development of a crack in the NMC particle. This crack within the NMC particle accelerates the degradation speed of the battery’s capacity [54]. With the large primary slit is caused by prolonged LTE, the NMC particle becomes easier to crack even under low current conditions, such as 0.5C cycling. Hence, although the 0.5C 24-hour LTE cell's performance became similar to that of the 0.5C normal cell, the 0.5C 24-hour LTE cell maintained a faster degradation rate compared to the other two cells. Nowadays, many researchers have found that through the use of additives [55], interface engineering [56], and electrode precoating [57], batteries can achieve greater stability under extreme conditions. Previous literature further confirms that adopting advanced electrolytes, doping, and morphological engineering can protect NMC particles from cracking during cycling, as detailed in Table S5. These combined approaches are believed to mitigate the effects of LTE and enhance the cycling performance of the battery.
4. Conclusion
The low temperature exposure of Li-ion batteries, overlooked by some researchers, has been shown to influence the degradation speed of half-cells. However, its effects, mechanisms, and distinctions remain unclear. This comprehensive multi-scale study concludes:
(1)
Low temperature exposure accelerates capacity degradation. After 24 h of low temperature exposure, capacity degradation rates increased by 0 %, 1.92 %, and 22.58 % for 0.5C, 1C, and 2C cycling conditions, respectively. For 48 h of exposure, these rates further increased to 2 %, 5.77 %, and 41.53 %. The presence of a distinctive sunken region in the NMC 811 H2 peak of the differential curve is more pronounced with higher cycling rates and longer exposure, which can serve as a predictive signal for low temperature exposure in battery management systems.
(2)
The acceleration of capacity degradation after low-temperature exposure begins with the cracking of NMC particles, which prevents Li+ ions from integrating into the Li-NMC crystals. These free Li+ ions then combine with free electrons to form metallic lithium. This metallic lithium reacts with the electrolyte, generating dead lithium that deposits on the electrode surface, inhibiting the intercalation of Li+ and reducing electrode capacity. The consumption of the electrolyte in these reactions further contributes to capacity degradation, as less electrolyte remains available to facilitate ion transport. On the separator, the reaction products from the electrolyte and metallic lithium adhere to its surface, obstructing ion transfer and further accelerating the formation of dead lithium.
(3)
Slits within NMC particles, caused by low temperature exposure, lead to stress concentrations that exceed the particles' tensile stress limits during charging, resulting in crack propagation. Prolonged low temperature exposure increases the severity of these cracks, contributing to faster capacity degradation.
Based on these findings, it is crucial to develop and implement strategies from existing literature, such as material doping and advanced electrolytes, to mitigate the adverse impacts of low temperature exposure. These strategies will enhance the reliability and longevity of lithium-ion batteries in extreme conditions, ensuring their stable performance in diverse applications.