1. Introduction
Unsymmetrical bending is expected for a section when direction of the bending moment coincides with neither of its principal axes. In unsymmetrical bending, direction of the lateral reaction force of a flexural member does not coincide with its top deformation. In a structural system, the lateral load resisting members are connected by the diaphragms, which is often assumed to be overwhelmingly stiff in terms of the axial deformation. As the lateral deformation of the floor imposes deflection in members with different principal axes, internal reaction forces perpendicular to direction of the storey drift are expected [16]. These out-of-plane reaction forces do not contribute to lateral resistance of the storey. In some RC walls with nonplanar section, the out-of-plane reaction forces can account for 30 % to 70 % of the lateral resistance they contribute in parallel with the lateral displacement [29].
In transferring the out-of-plane reaction forces, shear deformations are inevitably introduced in the structural members perpendicular to its top displacement [27]. As the out-of-plane lateral deformation is restrained by the storey diagrams, the member also bends in the out-of-plane direction in compatibility with the shear deformation. The bending and curvature in the out-of-plane direction may introduce significant additional vertical strains in the section of the wall. The compatibility between the shear and flexural deformation can be analysed with the Timoshenko beam theory which are commonly adopted in the analysis and design of RC structures in analogy with fibre element model [5], [23]. On the other hand, the structural members often have significantly reduced shear strength and stiffness in the out-of-plane lateral direction due to cracking and yielding of the vertical reinforcing bars. The out-of-plane deflections can be dramatically increased in these situations [13], [2], [12].
The out-of-plane buckling failure often controls ductility of structural RC walls [17]. The out-of-plane stability failure was reported by laboratory tests including the work by Oesterle [14], Goodsir [9], Thomson and Wallace [25], Zhang and Li [29] and Constantin and Beyer [4] and reported in recent earthquake events in Parra and Moehle [15], Sritharan [24], Blandon et al. [3] and Hoult et al. [11]. The existing equation for predicting the failure was found to be relatively insufficient, and researchers are investigating different details that could affect this kind of failure, including layout of the reinforcement [11], torsional stiffness [10] and distortional buckling [31]. Also, numerical studies were performed for this kind of failure based on sophisticated FE models by shell elements [6], [7] and brick elements [20] and new equations were proposed. For the out-of-plane buckling failure, the out-of-plane curvature is particularly important as stiffness of the wall segment is often low. The additional curvature introduced by the unsymmetrical bending could serve as an initial curvature and leads to an earlier out-of-plane buckling failure than expected.
This paper aims to examine the shear deformation and curvatures perpendicular to the loading plane in structural members sustaining unsymmetrical bending. A theoretical solution is given for the out-of-plane deflections based on elastic property and Timoshenko beam theory. Experimental data associated with the out-of-plane reaction forces and shear deformations were provided for RC walls with L-shaped and T-shaped sections. Influences of the unsymmetrical bending and out-of-plane deformation on behaviour of the members were further investigated with the experimental data and FE analyses. At last, suggestions were made for modelling the out-of-plane curvatures based on macro model.
2. Unsymmetrical bending and out-of-plane curvature
When the bending axis of a beam section is not parallel with any of its principal bending axes, unsymmetrical bending is expected where the curvature of the section does not coincide with the bending moment (Fig. 1). As structural members with various kinds of sections are used together joined together by the diagram, unsymmetrical bending is frequently expected as the storey floor drifts laterally due to earthquake or wind. As the floor deflects in a particular direction, the displacement for each individual member perpendicular to the direction is restrained. Out-of-plane curvatures are consequently introduced due to deformation compatibility with the shear deformation, which can be calculated by the Timoshenko beam theory. Considering a cantilever beam shown in Fig. 1, the curvature and moment of the wall section are the sum of the flexure and moment in the two principal bending axes. Therefore, the governing equations for the beam with consideration can be written as:
(1)

Download: Download high-res image (83KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Symmetric bending axes and unsymmetrical bending in structural members.

In Eq. (1), Vx and Vy are the shear force due to bending in x and y axes, respectively. Mx and My are the bending moment in the xz and yz plane. E is the elastic modulus while G is the shear modules. N is the axial load. A is area of the section. Ix and Iy are the second moment of inertia of the section. κx and κy are the shear correction factor for the section. ψx and ψy are the angle of rotation of the cross section due to bending.
Solving the governing equations as presented in Eq. (1) gives the deflections in the two principal bending directions for wall with height of H [1]:
(2)
For a structural member restrained by the diaphragms, the base of the member is fixed while the member is restrained of top displacement perpendicular to the loading direction of the storey floor. Assuming the storey drift to be Δ, factor A1 to B1 can be solved which gives explicit solution for u(z) and v(z). The deflected curve of the wall in the loading plane and in the plane perpendicular to the loading plane can be written separately as:
(3)
Eqs. (2), (3) gives the deflection of the member perpendicular to the loading plane, i.e. the out-of-plane direction. As the equation indicates, the deflection of the member perpendicular to the loading plane is zero at the base and the top of the member. On the other hand, the out-of-plane deflections can have non-zero values when z is between 0 and H. The out-of-plane curvature is introduced by compatibility between the shear deformations in the two principal directions and is expected commonly for structural members resisting lateral loads restrained by the floor diagram.
Using the derived theoretical solution, maximum out-of-plane curvature can be predicted in addition to the in-plane curvature. Fig. 2, Fig. 3, Fig. 4 show the calculated out-of-plane bending moment and curvature for members with different sectional profiles and lateral loading directions. The bending moment was presented as the moment of inertia projected into the loading direction and perpendicular to the loading direction, respectively. The curvature was derived based on a structural member with a height of 3 m with elastic concrete property. In particular, the shear reduction factor was calculated based on finite element analysis based on elastic property of the sections for the two principal bending axes. The calculation was based on calculation made on 3D FE analysis of the wall but used elastic property of the concrete. As the figures shows, significant out-of-plane reaction forces are expected even for members with rectangular sections. For these walls, the maximum out-of-plane reaction force could approach or even exceed the in-plane reaction forces in the loading direction around 60 degrees with plane of the member segment. This is understandable, as flexural stiffness of a structural member with a large aspect ratio in the longer direction is often much larger than that in the short direction. The in-plane and out-of-plane curvatures corresponding to different loading directions also indicate influences of the unsymmetrical bending and the corresponding shear deformation. It was observed that the member with a rectangular section with an aspect ratio of 2 have most significant out-of-plane curvature which corresponds to around 30 % of the in-plane value. For the members with L and T-shaped sections, similar tendencies were observed. For the L-shaped member, the maximum out-of-plane curvature accounts for around 3 % of the in-plane curvature when top displacement of the member is perpendicular to one of its segments which is not significant based on the elastic shear and flexural property. For L-shaped concrete members with the tip of the segment in compression, on the other hand, influences of the additional curvature could be significant due to the concentrated compressive strain and reduction of the shear stiffness in the out-of-plane direction.

Download: Download high-res image (385KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Moment of inertia and curvature corresponding to the in-plane and out-of-plane loading directions for rectangular section in different loading directions.


Download: Download high-res image (386KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Moment of inertia and curvature corresponding to the in-plane and out-of-plane loading directions for T-shaped section in different loading directions.


Download: Download high-res image (387KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Moment of inertia and curvature corresponding to the in-plane and out-of-plane loading directions for L-shaped section in different loading directions.

3. Experimental observations
Fig. 2, Fig. 4 demonstrate influences of the out-of-plane curvature in the elastic range. In reality, on the other hand, cracking and tension yielding of the vertical reinforcement could significantly reduce shear stiffness of the member and lead to larger out-of-plane curvatures than expected. An experimental program has been conducted in Nanyang Technological University which involves testing of walls specimens with various nonplanar section in the out-of-plane direction [29]. Presented here are the experimental data involved out-of-plane behaviour of these specimens.
Fig. 5 compares hysteresis loops of the in-plane and out-of-plane reaction forces of three L-shaped wall specimens. These walls were loaded in parallel with one of their segments which is in 45 degrees with its principal bending axes. The reaction forces in the in-plane and out-of-plane directions are presented. As the figure shows, a significant out-of-plane reaction force was observed with the top displacement for these specimens. The maximum out-of-plane reaction forces can account for 20 % to 50 % of the in-plane reaction forces. These portions are close to the expected values from Fig. 3.

Download: Download high-res image (474KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. In-plane and out-of-plane reaction forces for L-shaped structural members loaded in the unsymmetrical loading direction.

Together with the out-of-plane reaction forces, the shear deformation in the flange segment of the L-shaped walls was measured and presented in Fig. 6. The shear deformation was measured based on diagonal and vertical chains of LVDTs attached on flange segment of the wall. Significant differences were observed in the flange in tension direction compared with the flange in compression direction. For the flange in tension loading direction, the deformation was around 7 to 15 mm which accounts for 10 % to 30 % of the top displacement. The increased wall axial load ratio decreased the deformation significantly which is related with tension cracking of the flange and the reduced shear stiffness correspondingly. The out-of-plane shear stiffness of the wall specimens, calculated from the out-of-plane deformation and the reaction forces, was around 4kN/mm to 17kN/mm. These values were only around 1 % to 4 % of the elastic value. The deformation also indicates distinct curvature in the out-of-plane direction due to deformation compatibility. For the flange in compression loading direction, on the other hand, the shear deformation was much lesser with a maximum value around 3 mm. In addition to the shear deformation in flange segment of the L-shaped specimens, shear deformation was measured for T-shaped specimens in the web and flange segment respectively [29]. The out-of-plane shear deformation can be calculated by their vector combination. (Fig. 6) For the T-shaped walls, similar tendency was observed. The out-of-plane shear deformation depends heavily on the loading direction and the maximum value was observed while cracking significantly reduces shear stiffness of the flange. The maximum value was around 13 mm, indicating similar out-of-plane curvature in these specimens. Assuming an even distribution of the out-of-plane curvature in compatibility, the 13 to 15 mm out-of-plane shear deformation could lead to a maximum additional curvature of 3 × 10−3 m−1. The curvature is rather significant considering that the out-of-plane curvature also tends to concentrate at the locations where large in-plane curvatures exist due to the reduced flexural stiffness of the section [17], [19], [24], [8], [18].

Download: Download high-res image (208KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Shear deformation measured in the out-of-plane loading direction.

4. Numerical study
Due to limitations in the available measuring instruments, the out-of-plane deflections were not measured in detail for the L-shaped walls tested by Zhang and Li [29]. Three-dimensional FE models were built for these walls to provide additional information regarding these walls. (Fig. 7) The nonlinear FE analyses in this study were carried out using a computer program, TNO Diana 9.4 (Displacement method Analyser, version 9.4 [26]).

Download: Download high-res image (663KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Meshing of the FE models.

The models were composed of three-dimensional brick elements. Eight-node isoparametric solid elements were adopted. The reinforcing bars were embedded in the concrete elements. The elements of the model are small in the web tip and bottom of the wall which are vulnerable to out-of-plane buckling. In the flange and top of the wall, larger elements were adopted as illustrated in Fig. 7.
A smeared crack approach was adopted for the concrete. A crack is assumed to be initiated once the principal tensile stress in the concrete exceeds the tensile strength of the concrete. After a crack is initiated, the fracture mechanics criterion is applied to determine whether the crack will propagate which is based on facture energy. The fracture energy, Gf, is calculated as:
(4)
in which hc is the bandwidth of the cracks calculated as the cube root of the volume of an element.
After the crack opens, the direction of the crack is assumed to be fixed and the constitutive relation of the cracked concrete is evaluated coaxial to the direction of the crack. The influence of lateral confinements on the strength of the concrete was defined based on the model proposed by Selby and Vecchio [21]. The influence of lateral cracking on the compressive behaviour was taken into consideration by applying the model proposed by Vecchio and Collins [28]. Concrete in compression was simulated with the parabolic compression model in this project as demonstrated in Fig. 8. The factor of the model, fc and αc were derived from cylinder tests of the concrete. The reinforcing steel was modelled as idealized elastic until their characterized yield strain [22]. After yield, behaviour of the steel was modelled by their stress–strain curve derived from the experiment.

Download: Download high-res image (155KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Constitutive model for the concrete.

For validation of the modelling techniques, numerical models were built for Specimen LWN2 reported in Zhang [32]. The wall sustains unsymmetrical bending with an imposed top displacement perpendicular to one of the legs of L-shaped section. Details of the specimens were reported in [32]. Fig. 9 shows the predicted hysteresis curves compared with the experimental results. The FE derived curves in general matched the experimentally derived curves. The stiffness of the wall at low lateral drifts was slightly overestimated. Also, the pinching effect of the experimentally derived curves is slightly more served than the FE derived curve. The model predicted failure of the wall rather accurately. In the experiments, distinct out-of-plane deflections of the wall web can be observed in the first circle corresponding to a lateral drift ratio of 2.8 %. The lateral strength of the wall was observed to reduce severely at the second circle of the same drift ratio. The loss of lateral strength was predicted by the FE model.

Download: Download high-res image (154KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Comparisons of predicted and experimentally derived hysteresis curves.

Using the FE model, out-of-plane deflections of the wall was calculated and presented in Fig. 10. In particular, the out-of-plane deflection in different locations of the wall section varies significantly. The deflection in the flange remains approximately the same as shown in Fig. 10a. The deflection increased with the lateral drift ratio of the wall. The maximum value observed around the drift ratio of 2.8 % was around 5 mm. This value corresponds with the measured shear deformation shown in Fig. 8. The deflection in the web, on the other hand, depends heavily on locations along the web. The tip of the web segment, which is in large compressive strain, has significantly larger out-of-plane deflection compared with the other locations. This is an indication of warping and distortion of the L-shaped section, which is related with shift of the shear centres of the wall and torque [10], [30]. At a drift ratio of 0.25 %, the out-of-plane deflections were similar in different locations with a maximum value around 1.5 mm which was observed 1 m above the base of the wall. As the lateral drift ratio increased, the out-of-plane deflections at the tip of the web of the wall increased more dramatically than the other parts. At a lateral drift ratio of 1.0 %, the out-of-plane deflections at the tip of the web was 7 mm by most compared to the maximum deflection of 3 mm for the web end and flange tip. As the lateral drift ratio of 1.5 % and 2.8 %, the maximum out-of-plane deflections were 12 mm and 25 mm respectively at the tip of the web. The maximum out-of-plane deflections at the web end and flange tip, on the other hand, were around 3 mm and did not change significantly with the lateral drift ratio. This is quite significant and is believed to relate with the deformation compatibility and unsymmetrical bending investigated in this paper. The final failure of the wall, as indicated by the out-of-plane deformation at tip of the web of the wall, affected by torsion and warping of the section is larger than that.

Download: Download high-res image (233KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 10. Out-of-plane deflections in different locations of the wall at various lateral drift ratios.

More specifically, Fig. 11a and b illustrate the predicted lateral displacement at different locations of the web of wall at a height of 450 mm and 1800 mm, respectively. As the figures illustrates, rotation of the wall web increased gradually with the lateral drift ratio and the increase of the wall in lower part was significantly larger than the upper part. The displacement varied linearly along the web, indicating warping of the section as the web deflects from the flange. In the experimental test, sudden loss of the lateral strength of the wall was observed when the tip of the wall ruptured with the other parts. In the FE model, the predicted lateral strength significantly dropped after the lateral drift ratio of 2.8 %. Compared to the other experimental specimens which have failed due to out-of-plane buckling which sustains symmetrical bending only, the slenderness ratio (L/d) of these specimens were lower [25], [9]. Additionally, the empirical equation proposed by Paulay and Priestley [17] for preventing the out-of-plane buckling were compiled for the L-shaped walls. For prevention of the buckling with this mechanism, Paulay and Priestley [17] proposed to limit the thickness of the compressed end of the wall section with double layer of vertical reinforcement with length of the wall, lw and its required curvature ductility, µΦ.
(5)

Download: Download high-res image (186KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 11. Out-of-plane deflections of the wall in the web at different locations.

Based on the maximum acquired ductility factor in these specimens, the bc acquired for these specimens, 0.0522 lw, which is 46.98 mm. Given the thickness of the wall is 100 mm, thickness of the tested specimens surpassed the requirement significantly. The out-of-plane deformation associated with the unsymmetrical bending as well as the shift of shear centers [10], [30] are believed to be responsible for the unexpected stability failure.
5. Deformation compatibility of laterally restrained member sustaining unsymmetrical bending in the inelastic range
The additional curvature in the out-of-plane direction could lead to increased strains and earlier stability failure in the specimen, which leads to reduced ductility. In these cases, it is crucial to evaluate out-of-plane curvature of the structural members under inelastic deformation. The nonlinear fibre element model commonly used in analysis and design of the structural members can be adopted to calculate the curvature with some modifications.
Timoshenko beam is commonly used in conjunction with the fibre sections. Additionally, researchers have proposed to add additional nonlinear springs in wide-column models to represent the shear deformation associated [2]. Similar methods can be used to model the out-of-plane deflections associated with the deformation compatibility. Two models were built with fibre beam-column elements for the L-shaped wall tested by Zhang and Li [29] as illustrated in Fig. 12. Explicit nonlinear material properties and geometric nonlinearities were adopted for the vertical beam element for both the models. In the first model, elastic shear stiffness was assumed for the beam elements and the elastic torsional stiffness was assigned between the horizontal rigid links. In the second model, the shear was reduced in accordance with the experimental data presented in the previous section. Also, stiffness of the torsional spring was reduced based on the FE results. The out-of-plane displacements predicted by these models are plotted in Fig. 13 and Fig. 14 in conjunction with predictions made by Eqs. (2), (3) for comparisons. As the lateral deformation for different locations in the wall section could vary, different curves were plotted. As the figure shows, the predicted deflections made by the first model generally matched with predictions made by Eqs. (2), (3) at the lateral drift ratio of 0.5 %. As the lateral displacement increases, the sectional stiffness of the wall at base generally reduces and the deflection curves vary from predictions made by Eqs. (2), (3). The maximum out-of-plane deflection predicted by the wide-column model is approximately 17 % larger than that predicted by Eqs. (3), (4). When the adjusted inelastic shear and torsional properties were adopted, the out-of-plane deflections were much larger. At a drift ratio of 0.5 %, the fibre element model predicts a maximum out-of-plane displacement of 0.8 mm which occurs at 20 % of the wall height. The maximum displacement was approximately 220 % larger than predictions made by Eqs. (2), (3). The predicted results matched the out-of-plane deflections (Fig. 14) at flange of the wall. When the lateral drift ratio increased to 2.8 %, the out-of-plane displacement continues to increase and the displacement at the tip (away from the flange) and end (adjacent to the flange) of the web of the wall varies. The maximum displacement occurred in the web end is 3.6 mm. The out-of-plane displacement at the tip, on the other hand, was much larger than that of the web. The maximum displacement was 17.6 mm which occurred at 6 % height of the wall. The deflections predicted by the modified fibre element model generally matched calculated results from the FE model. It should be noted that the method required detailed information about out-of-plane shear and torsional stiffness of the member. Efforts were made by various researchers about these behavior including the work by Beyer et al. [2], Hoult et al. [11] and Zhang and Li [30]. However, further research is still required to establish an accurate relation.

Download: Download high-res image (159KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 12. Wide-column model for LWN2 tested by Zhang and Li [29].


Download: Download high-res image (295KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 13. Predicted out-of-plane deflections based on wide-column model adopting elastic shear and torsional stiffness.


Download: Download high-res image (297KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 14. Predicted out-of-plane deflections based on wide-column model adopting modified shear and torsional stiffness.

6. Conclusions
This paper aims to investigate influences of the unsymmetrical bending on behaviour of structural members. This kind of bending would create significant shear deformation and flexural curvatures perpendicular to the loading plane. The following conclusions are drawn in this paper.
1.
Due to out-of-plane constraints and the shear deformation introduced by the out-of-plane reaction forces, additional curvatures are introduced in members sustaining unsymmetrical bending. A theoretical solution is given based on Timoshenko beam theory.
2.
Due to the reduced out-of-plane shear stiffness with inelastic deformation, out-of-plane curvature associated with the unsymmetrical bending can be significantly increased. For the non-planar wall specimens presented, the out-of-plane shear deformation was 10 to 15 mm corresponding to a top lateral displacement of 75 mm. The deformation corresponds to an additional out-of-plane curvature of 3 × 10−3 m−1.
3.
By using inelastic in-plane and out-of-plane shear stiffness in the fibre element model, deformations and curvatures associated with the unsymmetrical bending can be modelled. However, numerical models indicate significant influences of the warping of the section which requires further investigations.