Abstract
Tritium retention is a critical aspect of plasma-facing wall component performance in fusion reactors as well as reactor safety due to radiological risks it may pose. It is also of importance in the case of tungsten, including tungsten composites, which are selected as first wall and divertor material at devices such as ITER due to its high melting point and mechanical strength. This study aims to investigate surface characteristics, tritium retention behaviour and effect of baking on tungsten composite plasma-facing wall components from Joint European Torus (JET) divertor region and contribute to the understanding of tritium trapping within them.
Three ITER-like wall (ILW) experimental campaigns involved exposing tungsten-molybdenum coated carbon fibre composite (CFC) samples to deuterium-deuterium (D-D) plasma discharges at various operating conditions, including different plasma densities, temperatures, and exposure times. The plasma-facing surfaces were characterized using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) in combination with energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDX) and tritium retention was assessed using thermal desorption spectroscopy (TDS) and full combustion. Baking cycle was simulated by keeping the sample at 350℃ for 100 h, followed by TDS and full combustion.
Results indicate tritium retention varying from 2 to 120∙1012 T atoms/plasma facing surface cm2. A deposition layer was found to be present for most samples analysed in this study ranging from 0 to 58 µm in thickness. For Tile 0 an increase in tritium retention was observed by the increase in the thickness of the deposition layer, whilst for Tile 1 deposition was not found to be the main source of retention. Tritium desorption temperatures were found to be higher than that proposed for baking at ITER − for Tile 0 tritium desorption peaks at about 540-640℃, while for tile 1 it is generally lower, but with a larger deviation ranging from 350 up to 570℃.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Joint European TorusITER like wallTritiumPlasma facing componentsTungsten
1. Introduction
Plasma-facing components (PFCs) in fusion reactors like ITER and DEMO are planned to incorporate tungsten (W) and its alloys, chosen for their elevated melting point and minimal sputtering yield, but may also cause radiation losses if entering plasma [1,2]. The ITER-Like-Wall project (ILW) has been carried out at the Joint European Torus (JET) to test vacuum vessel materials consisting of beryllium inner and outer walls as well as tungsten and tungsten coated CFC divertor tiles. After three series of campaigns where tiles were exposed to D-D plasmas, wall components were retrieved for ex-situ analysis to measure deuterium and tritium retained within the PFCs, removal by baking as well as surface defects created upon interactions with plasma [3].
Within the ILW experimental series, no tritium was introduced in the vacuum vessel. Nevertheless, there are several other possible sources of tritium:
•
energetic (1.01 MeV) tritium ion production as a result of D–D reaction [4];
(1)
•
in-vessel tritium inventory remaining from previous D–T campaigns [5,6];
•
tritium production in neutron-induced transmutation of beryllium (can be considered negligible due to low neutron yield in ILW campaigns).
The main source of tritium within the samples analysed is considered to be the energetic T produced from the D-D reaction [7]. Afterwards it can be retained within the material by either implantation due to its high kinetic energy or co-deposition with eroded materials that have been sputtered, followed by diffusion into the bulk. Due to the small size of hydrogen and its isotopes, tritium is quite mobile and can diffuse deep within the material. Retention may also increase due to 14 MeV neutron irradiation by fostering strong hydrogen trapping in radiation defects [8]. However 14 MeV neutron production in low in D-D plasma operations and therefore this mechanism is not expected to be present in the JET samples analysed here.
ITER foresees divertor baking up to 350℃ to recover the tritium that has been retained within the PFC [9]. The effectiveness of this technique, however, is strongly reduced when the impurity layers grow above 50 μm, which is likely to occur within a single operations campaign [10]. If the impurity deposition layer consists of carbon, large retention is expected since T inventory accumulation rate was found to be about 40 % of injected amount in DTE1 with carbon walls. For ILW main constituent of deposition layer has been reported to be beryllium due to its erosion from limiters[11]. To out-gas tritium from thick layers, much higher temperatures maybe be needed than 350℃ [10].
In this study, the change of surface composition and morphology was analyzed to evaluate the composition of samples and measure the thickness of the deposition layer, if present, for tungsten interlayered with molybdenum coated CFC plasma facing components that have been present in the upper part of the inner divertor of JET vacuum vessel throughout all three D-D ILW campaigns. To assess the retention of tritium within the plasma facing components the total tritium content was determined together with the temperatures of the desorption peaks for tritium. Unique experiments simulating the baking cycle were performed to give an insight into the efficacy of tritium removal. The impact of the deposition layer on the total tritium, the removal efficacy and the temperatures of the desorption peaks are discussed. The research aims to evaluate the efficacy of baking as a method for tritium removal by combination of baking, thermal desorption and full combustion, which gives a thorough information about tritium removal. Factors influencing removal efficacy are also investigated to give insights for future fusion reactors such as ITER.
2. Experimental
2.1. Samples
Samples from the upper part of the divertor tiles – high field gap closure (HFGC or Tile 0) and Tile 1 (14IWG1) were studied. The samples were selected systematically across different positions of each tile. These tiles have been retrieved after being present in all three ITER-like wall campaigns at JET (ILW1-3) making them valuable for investigation of tritium retention after multiple pulses of conditions similar to those expected in future reactors. Only Tile 0 and Tile 1 were removed from the vessel and sent for analysis. In JET ILW1-3 only D-D plasma experiments were performed – prior to any new T injection (except for that of DTE1 in 1997).
The samples are sectors (half or quarter) of ∅17 mm discs cut from CFC tiles coated with ∼10–15 μm tungsten interlayered with ∼3 μm molybdenum. Four columns of discs have been drilled per row. The rows are numbered by distance from the inner wall or divertor (the larger the number the closer the sample is located to the inner wall).
Locations of the tiles and approximate locations of studied samples and their photographs are provided in Fig. 1.

Download: Download high-res image (248KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Position of tiles analysed (Tile 0 or HGFC & 1 or 14W_G1A) within the vacuum vessel and representation of a sample.

2.2. Methods
Prior to tritium quantification experiments, all the samples were analysed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) in conjunction with energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDX) in order to evaluate the change in the surface morphology and measure the thickness of the deposition layer from a cross-section of the sample.
Based on previous work with tritium desorption from beryllium [12] as well as tungsten [13] and an in-depth analysis of fuel desorption methods [3], thermal methods were chosen as the prefered technique for tritium quantification.
Two types of thermal desorption methods were used for tritium quantification to compare the impact of carrier gas on tritium removal if there is any. The first method was performed in a flow of He + 0.1 % H2 purge gas. The sample is placed and heated in a quartz tube with two compartments – one for the sample and one for a bed of granulated zinc. A quartz cap of the tube had a thermocouple channel. The zinc bed is used to convert tritiated water to molecular gaseous tritium (HT, DT, and traces of T2). The temperatures of the sample, the zinc bed and the cold trap were continuously measured. The tritium activity in the purge gas was continuously monitored using a proportional counter. Heating rate of 5 K/min has been used with a maximum temperature 1305 K.
The second method uses Ar as carrier gas and uses heating rate of 10 K/min up to 1373 K. Method of detection remains the same – a proportional counter.
In the full combustion method (FC) the sample is heater up to the temperature of 1123 – 1143 K and released tritium is oxidized into water (HTO, DTO) using CuO in a moisturized air flow, collected in water bubblers (until background values are reached) and measured by liquid scintillation; additional details of set-up can be found in [14].
The baking experiment is performed in a quartz tube which is heated to 623 K (350℃) and kept at constant temperature for 100 h. Afterwards the tritium outgassed during baking is measured with a proportional counter in Ar + 0.1 % H2 carrier gas. The remaining tritium is measured with TDS followed by full combustion method described above. Combination of all 3 methods gives a comprehensive evaluation of tritium removal.
Tritium decay has been considered and all the measurement data recalculated as per day of the retrieval of the material from the vacuum vessel which in this case is 16/10/2016 or the end of ILW3 campaign.
3. Results and discussion
The thickness of the impurity deposition layer, the desorption temperatures and the total amount of tritium together with the baking results measured by different methods for tungsten-molybdenum interlayered coated CFC materials exposed to D – D plasma during ILW are presented in this section.
3.1. Total tritium retained
Tritium concentration was measured as tritium atoms per square centimeter of the plasma facing surface. Where possible, two different methods were used for tritium quantification for 2 sectors of the same disc. Only results of samples where two methods were used for the same disc are reported in this section. The tritium concentration was found ranging from 2∙1012 to 120·1012 atoms/cm2 with its highest concentrations in the lower parts of the tile 0 and at the upper part or around the curvature of Tile 1 (rows 9–11). The results acquired by all methods (single run for each sample) arranged by tile and position are reported in Fig. 2.

Download: Download high-res image (126KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Total tritium retention by position and analysis method.

These results show a similar pattern to that of deuterium, where the largest amounts of T were found to be located at the lower-middle part of Tile 0 and the upper part of Tile 1 for both ILW-1 and ILW-2 [15,16]. The upper part of the inner divertor is reported to be the location contributing to about 50 % of the total long-term fuel inventory [17,18]. Similar trends for both deuterium and tritium retention is expected if co-deposition is the main mechanism for retention.
Comparing the results to those reported for tritium after ILW-1 and ILW-3 for Tile 1, our results from ILW1-3 are 2–10 times larger than those for a single campaign [7], which may indicate accumulation throughout all three campaigns.
Comparing results for different parts of the same disc measured with different methods, no direct patterns can be seen that would indicate a disadvantage of a certain method, but quite large differences between samples from the same disc can be seen. This may be due to non-homogenous tritium retention or defects in samples themselves (delamination of deposition layer, crumbling during cutting etc.). Measurement uncertainties should also be considered – TDS measurements were done with a proportional counter and samples with smaller amounts of tritium were approaching quantification limit, therefore increasing the uncertainty.
3.2. Surface analysis
When analyzing surface modifications after being exposed to D-D plasma, signs of melting and re-solidification can be noticed ((Fig. 3)). No significant difference between the Tile 0 and Tile 1 samples were found. It must be noted that most of the samples have at least some deposition layer therefore the re-solidified material on the surface is not tungsten, but rather beryllium.

Download: Download high-res image (96KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Surface morphology of Tile 1 position 9 (left) and Tile 0 position 3a (right) samples.

When analyzing the cross section of the samples a similar layer structure was observed for all the samples differing only in the thickness of the deposition layer. An example of a typical SEM image of a samples cross-sections can be found in Fig. 4, Fig. 5.

Download: Download high-res image (172KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Cross section of a Tile 0 position 1a sample.


Download: Download high-res image (88KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Cross section of a Tile 1 position 9 sample.

Three distinct areas can be identified – deposition layer at the plasma facing surface mainly consisting of beryllium, typical elongated transversally grained tungsten with a molybdenum interlayer (at the CFC interface) in the middle and CFC with clearly visible cross-sections at the bottom. SEM images in Fig. 4, Fig. 5 are representative of all the samples analysed in this study, differing mostly in the thickness of deposition layer.
The thickness of the deposition layer was measured prior to the tritium measurements. Thicknesses of 20 μm for Tile 0 after ILW1 and 5 μm for Tile 1 after ILW1 and 10 μm after ILW2 have been reported earlier [19]. Our results for ILW1-3 show larger values for the thickness of the deposition layer which might be expected since an increase in the layer thickness throughout campaigns has been noted for ILW1 + 2 campaign to be up to 40 μm, for the lower part of Tile 0, 10 μm for the upper part of Tile 1 after ILW-2 and 14 μm after ILW-3 [16]. The lower part of Tile 1 is reported to have a deposited layer of 2 μm in thickness– same as in this study [15]. Smaller deposition layer for the bottom of Tile 1 may be explained by the tile being closer to the inner strike point which was on Tile 3 for ILW3 [20].
The average thickness of the deposition layer by position can be found in Table 1.
Table 1. Thickness of the deposition layer by location.

Tile	Position	c	b	a	Nr
Empty Cell	Empty Cell	Deposition layer thickness, μm
Tile 0	5		2 ± 1	0	
3	38 ± 4	39 ± 7	18 ± 4	
1	58 ± 2	40 ± 4	14 ± 5	
Tile 1	11		37 ± 5		38 ± 12
10		19 ± 7	32 ± 3	24 ± 3
9		30 ± 10	17 ± 3	39 ± 6
6			2.0 ± 0.3	
1			1.8 ± 0.2	
Similarly to the findings of tritium retention, the thickest layers of deposition were found at the lower-middle Tile 0 and at the top of Tile 1 (see Table 1). The relationship between these two attributes was further investigated revealing a correlation for Tile 0 – an increase in the thickness of the deposition layer correlates with larger amounts of tritium retained in a sample (Fig. 6, single-run results for T retained). This correlation is not universally valid, because outliers like sample 5b, which has a thin deposition layer, but not the smallest tritium retention, are observed. Further inspection was not possible due to destructive nature of the experiments, therefore additional investigation is necessary to determine the cause of this.

Download: Download high-res image (83KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Tritium retained as a function of the thickness of the deposition layer, Tile 0.

Very low implantation depth for D in W has been reported (∼3μm), which also leads to conclusions of co-deposition being a leading source of T retention similar to that reported for deuterium [[21], [22], [23]]. It has also been observed that introduction of carbon in tungsten samples (WC) exposed to deuterium increases its retention supposedly due to an “open” microstructure and crystal lattice defects or C–H chemistry [8]. No correlation was observed for Tile 1 (Fig. 7, single-run results for T retained).), where slightly smaller tritium retention was observed meaning that co-deposition is not the leading source of tritium in this part.

Download: Download high-res image (82KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Tritium retained as a function of the thickness of the deposition layer, Tile 1.

For tritium, the main concerns associated with deposition layer formation are related to differences created in desorption mechanisms from bulk material. ITER bake-out temperature at the divertor is planned to be 350℃, which might be enough for pure mono-metallic materials, but the desorbed deuterium and tritium might remain retained in the deposit layer [10]. To further analyse tritium distribution withing the samples, a depth profile must be acquired. Lack of depth-resolved or compositional data in sputtered regions restricts interpretation of material changes and retention mechanisms. Additional experiments with electrochemical etching are proposed to test this as done previously [24].
3.3. Tritium outgassing fraction after baking
To estimate the potential efficacy of baking at 350℃, baking experiments were performed. Of the 8 samples analyzed only one showed full desorption during baking, whilst others showed an efficacy below 30 % close to that previously reported in [25]. For most samples, nearly all tritium is believed to be removed during baking and TDS leaving <1 % of total tritium measured in the full combustion following, whilst Tile 0 samples 3b&5b still have significant amount of tritium retained even after TDS. Fractional distribution by all 3 steps of baking experiments is shown in Fig. 8 (single-run results for T retained with each method) and Table 2. It is assumed that all tritium has been recovered from the tiles, although validation of this has not been done. It is possible that some tritium is still present.

Download: Download high-res image (128KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Fraction of T removed during baking, TDS and following full combustion.

Table 2. Tritium retained and corresponding baking efficiency.

Empty Cell	Position	Tritium retained, T atoms∙1012/cm2	% desorbed by baking
Tile 0	5b	27 ± 1	2
3c	10 ± 5	7
3b	37 ± 8	27
1c	4 ± 1	21
Tile 1	10a	40 ± 9	2
9a	15 ± 3	24
6a	13 ± 4	26
1a	23 ± 4	100
Opposite trends can be seen for Tile 0 and Tile 1 when looking at tritium fraction removed by baking and corresponding deposition layer – for Tile 0, where co-deposition is the main source of tritium, increase in deposition seems to facilitate tritium removal, but it is not the case for Tile 1. This may be explained by the looser structure of deposition layer compared to that of pristine sample. More baking experiments must be performed to draw conclusions regarding the impact of deposition on tritium bake-out efficiency.
It has been estimated that D removal fraction of 80 % may be expected if Be-D co-deposited layer was exposed to D plasma at 600℃ or 80 % for tritium at 500℃ if maintained for 1200 s [10]. For baking at 400℃ an efficacy of 30 % is expected which agrees with the results of this publication.
Promising results regarding improvements in baking efficacy for tritium removal have been reported in experiments when baking was performed in deuterium atmosphere. It can be explained either by isotope exchange or structural defects being filled by D atoms therefore inhibiting re-trapping of T at such traps [26].
3.4. Tritium desorption temperature
TDS measurements give insight into the differences in tritium desorption temperatures between tile 0 and tile 1. For Tile 0 tritium desorption peaks at about 560-660℃ (Fig. 9), while for tile 1 it is generally lower, but with a larger deviation ranging from 350 up to 570℃ (Fig. 10), similar to those reported in [19] for deuterium. Tile 0 also shows some increase in desorption temperature with the increase in deposition layer thickness, which doesn’t seem to be the case for tile 1.

Download: Download high-res image (85KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Tritium TDS spectra for Tile 0 samples.


Download: Download high-res image (111KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 10. Tritium TDS spectra for Tile 1 samples.

It must be noted that for Tile 1 samples 9, 10b2 and 11 different carrier gas was used – He + 0.1 % H2, which may have some impact on the results.
While tile 1 tritium desorption temperature is close to that of baking and tritium can partially be baked-out at the temperature proposed for ITER, tile 0 tritium desorption occurs at temperatures well above those proposed. Higher temperatures, longer baking or other de-tritiation methods together with bake-out must be used for full tritium removal [25].
Temperatures high enough for the full tritium removal from the deposition layer may be reached based on ILW thermal contact resistance measurements and raised inner strike point scenario could be used as an alternative de-tritiation method for thick deposits at the inner divertor [10]. Such a method has already been implemented after DTE2 at JET where it was reported to have removed ∼3.5 % of T from the total T removed in the experiment series. Baking remains the major contributor to the T removal, removing ∼58 % of the total T removed. Doubling of the tritium removal efficacy was achieved when the baking temperature was raised from 240℃ to 320℃ [17]. It must be emphasized that DTE2 used D-T plasma whilst in the ILW experiments T was the product of D-D plasma so discrepancies between the desorption mechanisms may be present. Pre-charging of materials with D in the previous experiments before DTE2 also must be noted.
