Introduction
Stress corrosion cracking (SCC) is cracking due to a process involving conjoint corrosion and straining of a metal due to
residual or applied stresses. SCC is known as an insidious form of corrosion failure and it results in a significant drop in the
mechanical strength only with little metal loss. Another important point is that although this failure cannot be recognized by
casual inspection, it can lead to a catastrophic damage of components and structures such as the rupture of high-pressure gas
transmission pipes, the explosion of boilers and the destruction of power stations and oil refineries.
In phenomenological viewpoint, the occurrence of SCC depends on three simultaneous requirements; a susceptible
material, an environment that causes SCC for that material, and sufficient tensile stress to induce SCC. Three principal
mechanisms of SCC are active path dissolution (accelerated corrosion along a path of higher than normal corrosion
susceptibility such as the grain boundary), hydrogen embrittlement and film-induced cleavage. However, SCC is an
avoidable process by preventing the specific combinations of metal and environment that are subject to the problem.
Heat exchangers are common equipments in many industries employed for the cooling/heating purposes. The plate heat
exchanger (PHE) or plate and frame heat exchanger is a type of heat exchangers that comprises of the special metal plates
and sealing polymeric gaskets; when two fluids with different temperatures pass over two opposite sides of the plates, the
heat transfers from the hot side to the cold side. Excellent heat transfer characteristics, easy maintenance and fast
Case Studies in Engineering Failure Analysis 5–6 (2016) 59–66
A R T I C L E I N F O
Article history:
Received 25 November 2015
Received in revised form 25 February 2016
Accepted 7 March 2016
Available online 12 March 2016
Keywords:
SCC
Chloride build-up
Pitting
Plate heat exchanger
A B S T R A C T
In Jam petrochemical complex (JPC), Iran, the plates (ASTM A.240 Type.316) of some heat
exchangers have been damaged due to the occurrence of cracks at the sitting place of
gaskets. A comprehensive failure analysis including the chemical analysis, visual
inspection, optical microscopy and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of the cracks
spread over the plates together with the energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) of the
corrosion products and the measurement of chloride and sulfide ions content of the
process water were employed for the examination of the failure mode and its causes. The
obtained results indicate the building-up of the chloride and sulfide ions at the crevices
between plates and gaskets at high temperature leads to stress cracking corrosion (SCC) of
the plates. Moreover, the simultaneous presence of chloride and sulfide in the media
hastens the SCC failure in the heat exchanger plates.
 2016 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
* Corresponding author at: P.O. Box 14155-6591, Asalouyeh, Iran. Tel.: +98 9123541962.
E-mail address: hkhodamorad@gmail.com (S.H. Khodamorad).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Case Studies in Engineering Failure Analysis
j ou rnal homepa ge: www.elsevier. com/locate/c sefa
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.csefa.2016.03.001
2213-2902/ 2016 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/
4.0/).
modification are the advantages of this type of heat exchangers which make them a widely used and important part of many
industries such as petrochemical complexes [1]. Austenitic stainless steels are widely used in manufacturing of the special
plates for PHE. The main benefit ofthe stainless steels is the corrosion resistivity. However, as previously mentioned,they are
susceptible to local corrosion like pitting corrosion and stress corrosion cracking (SCC) [2–4]. Cooperation of stress and
specific media such as the chloride or sulfide containing media is mandatory for SCC of susceptible materials. The
simultaneous presence of mechanical stress and chloride or sulfide ions in environment accelerates the corrosion failure of
metal.
A survey of previous literature on prevention of SCC failure provides some clues about the important factors in such
systems. For example, Orlikowsky and Krakowiak [5] studied the SCC failure of an AISI 304 stainless steel tank containing hot
water (70–80 8C) containing 55–100 mg/dm3 chloride ions. They reported the causes of SCC as the bending of unclamped
surge pipeline, hydrostatic pressure of water and buckling forces of tank as the origin of stress. Moreover, Yongde et al. [6]
evaluated the failure of a 304 stainless steel tube in gas analyzer and they found that the presence of chloride and sulfide in
the ventilating pipe and the residual stresses of manufacturing together with the airflow pressure on the pipe are responsible
for the corrosion failure.
In Jam petrochemical complex (JPC), Iran, the plates of some heat exchangers have been damaged due to the occurrence of
cracks at the sitting place of gaskets. The heat exchangers have been in service since 2008. They are placed in a wet
environment (with a humidity of usually more than 70%) at an ambient temperature of 45 8C in hot season. The main causes
of maintenance include the thermal efficiency decrement and pressure drop increment because of fouling, leakage or
intermixing of two fluids due to gasket failure. Under normal conditions, each of these heat exchangers has a routine
inspection and maintenance schedule after four months in service to prevent the unexpected shut down of plant. The routine
maintenance procedure includes low pressure (less than 20 barg) water jet cleaning, visual inspection of plates and gaskets,
failed gasket and plate replacement and assembly of heat exchanger. Furthermore, the cleaning in place (CIP) with chemical
reagents and Back flashing method are using to cleaning of heat exchanger without disassemble.
The aim of the present work was to identify and quantify the mode and principal causes of corrosion failure in the PHE by
using appropriate analysis methods including visual inspection, optical and scanning electron microscopy, energy dispersive
X-ray spectroscopy (EDS), thermo-scan analysis, and measurement of chloride and sulfide content of the waters.
2. Materials and methods
The plate heat exchanger (PHE) of JPC has 56 special stainless steel plates (ASTM A240 Type.316) with special sealing
gaskets between them. The practical thickness of the plates is 0.5 mm without any coating. A schematic view of PHE is
presented in Fig. 1. This heat exchanger is using for cooling of the hot transport water (TW) by cooling water (CW). Both
transport water (TW) and cooling water (CW) are de-mineralized with a maximum content of 50 ppm Cl and 8–10 ppm
dissolved oxygen. The operating condition of failed PHE of JPC is shown in Table 1.
The majority of the cracks have appeared in the upper gasket seat and also some cracks have been observed under two
sideward gasket seats of the PHE. In addition, the around of these cracks has been covered with a rusty layer as shown in
Fig. 2.
The chemical analysis of plates was done by PMI-MASTER Pro spark emission spectrometer and results are shown in
Table 2.
The temperature analysis was applied by SATIR HY-G90 infrared camera. The specimens for optical microscopic analysis
prepared according to ASTM E3-11 and micro etch treatment had done as per ASTM E407-11 by Glycergia.
Fig. 1. Schematic of plate heat exchanger.
60 S.H. Khodamorad et al. / Case Studies in Engineering Failure Analysis 5–6 (2016) 59–66
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Visual inspection
Generally the visual inspection by naked eye is the first step to roughly estimate the type and cause of failures. As it can be
observed in Fig. 3, the branched cracks alongside the gasket seat grooves of plates are present and also, some corrosion pits
are visible around theses grooves. These pits can act as the start points for the propagating of cracks over the plates when the
mechanical stress is present in the system [7]. Although the border areas of plates are not in contact with the cooling or
transport water, there are many crevices between them which are subjected to the pitting by crevice corrosion. Fig. 4 shows
such pits on the border areas of the plates.
In addition of the pitting corrosion, the presence of a brownish layer on the gasket seat grooves is an indicative for the
corrosion occurrence. However, there is no significant sign of pitting in the interior/central parts of the plates despite the fact
that these parts contribute in the cooling process and the water flows across them.
Fig. 3. Presence of cracks and pits on gasket sitting groove.
Fig. 2. Appearance of a crack on the gasket seat of heat exchanger plates.
Table 2
Chemical composition of plates of heat exchanger.
Element C Mn Si Cr Ni Mo Ti
Wt% 0.08 1.46 0.12 15.2 11.1 2.11 0.05
Table 1
Operating condition of failed PHE of JPC.
Water Inlet temp. (8C) Outlet temp. (8C) Inlet pressure (barg) Outlet pressure (barg)
TW 80 70 4.9 4.4
CW 38 48 6.5 6
S.H. Khodamorad et al. / Case Studies in Engineering Failure Analysis 5–6 (2016) 59–66 61
3.2. Microscopic analysis
Three samples namely 1, 2 and 3 were prepared from three different plates for microscopic studies.
3.2.1. Sample 1
Regarding the microstructure of Sample 1 presented in Fig. 5(a) and (b), the structure includes the austenitic matrix with
some intergranular and transgranular cracks. According to SEM image shown in Fig. 5(c), these cracks are relatively sharp
and straight passing through the boundaries and austenitic grains. The branched cracks are typical signs of SCC [6–8].
Fig. 4. Pitting corrosion on border area of failed heat exchanger plates.
Fig. 5. (a) and (b): Microstructure and (c) SEM of Sample 1.
62 S.H. Khodamorad et al. / Case Studies in Engineering Failure Analysis 5–6 (2016) 59–66
Intergranular SCC also commonly indicates the contribution of corrosion process in the cracking of plates [9] and on the other
hand, the appearance of transgranular SCC in the microstructure of the plates confirms the high mechanical stress conditions
[10]. Garcia et al. reported that transgranular SCC susceptibility decreases at lower level of cold stress but the intergranular
SCC susceptibility increases [10]. The superimposing of residual stresses leads to the cold forming of the plates and on the
other hand, the stresses resulted from temperature/pressure fluctuations as well as the repair and maintenance stresses
are the main sources of SCC. The small black dots observed in Fig. 5(a) and (b) are assigned to the micro-pits distributed in the
microstructure.
3.2.2. Sample 2
Based on the microstructure of Sample 2 shown in Fig. 6(a), the structure includes the austenitic matrix with
some intergranular and transgranular cracks similar to Sample 1. Fig. 6(b) implies the presence of some twinning in the
microstructure of sample. As a matter of knowledge, the twinning phenomenon requires high level of stress which can be
accounted as a sign for high residual and/or applied stress in the microstructure of plates due to the plastic deformation [11].
The SEM image of Sample 2 (Fig. 6(c)) shows the growth of cracks in several directions in the tip of a primary crack. These
micro-cracks are additional supportive evidences for SCC.
3.2.3. Sample 3
As can be seen in Fig. 7(a) and (b), the microstructural features of Sample 3 is similar to Samples 1 and 2. There is a micropit as a start point for SCC (Fig. 7(b)). Also, the tip of crack contains some corrosion products according to the SEM image
(Fig. 7(c)). This indicates that the corrosion plays an important role in the failure of plates and the formations of cracks stems
from the simultaneous occurrence of corrosion and mechanical stress.
Fig. 6. (a) and (b): Microstructure and (c) SEM of Sample 2.
S.H. Khodamorad et al. / Case Studies in Engineering Failure Analysis 5–6 (2016) 59–66 63
3.3. EDS analysis
Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) of the brownish (rusty) layer formed around and in the cracks is shown in
Fig. 8. According to EDS spectrum, the brownish (rusty) layer contains Fe, Cr, O as well as S and Cl. Fig. 8 shows the EDS
Fig. 7. (a) and (b): Microstructure and (c) SEM of Sample 3.
Fig. 8. EDS analysis of corrosion products in Sample 1.
64 S.H. Khodamorad et al. / Case Studies in Engineering Failure Analysis 5–6 (2016) 59–66
analysis of Sample 1. The presence of Fe, Cr and O can be attributed to the corrosion products of S.S 316 [11]. The presence of
chloride in the EDS spectrum also confirms the contribution of Cl– in pitting corrosion of the protective layer of 316 stainless
steel plates. It can be concluded that the formation of the pits and the presence of stress can lead to Cl-SCC failure of plates.
Also, sulfide ion can significantly accelerate the SCC failure of the plate [6].
3.4. Thermo-scan analysis
Temperature analysis was conducted via infrared camera for the evaluation of the temperature profile of several areas of
PHE. According to thermo-scan result illustrated in Fig. 9, the maximum temperature of the exchanger is around 99 8C in the
top of PHE that belongs to TW inlet of exchanger. The value of temperature is higher than the design temperature of heat
exchanger. The history of equipment revealed that in a period of operation around one year ago, the temperature of TW
increases due to some process changes. During this period, the water that called service water (SW) was poured over the PHE
to increase the cooling rate and reduce the TW outlet temperature. Moreover, as it can be seen in Fig. 3, there is a brownish
layer over the zigzag edge of plates which imply the presence of suspended soil in the service water.
3.5. Chloride and sulfur concentration measurement
The chloride and sulfide content of the TW, CW and SW were measured for the confirmation of SCC postulation. However,
the results show the both chloride and sulfide contents are around 1–3 ppm in all waters. According to API 571-4.5.1.3, there
is no definite minimal limit for chloride ions because the local concentration of chloride ions can always occur. Therefore,
although the chloride and sulfide ions levels of SW is low, the evaporation of SW in crevices due to high temperature of TW
inlet and CW outlet, can lead to locally concentration of these ions. Similar observations have been reported about the local
chloride-buildup at high temperature in crevices [4,8].
4. Conclusions
In this study, the principal causes of corrosion failure in the plate heat exchanger (PHE) of Jam Petrochemical Complex
(JPC), Asalouyeh, Iran, were evaluated via visual inspection, optical and scanning electron microscopy, energy dispersive Xray spectroscopy (EDS), thermo-scan analysis, and measurement of chloride and sulfide content of the waters. It was found
that the chloride ions build-up in crevices formed between plates and gaskets (at high temperatures), is the main reason for
the occurrence of SCC. The suspended soil ofthe service water settled in the crevices between gasket and plate and provides a
favorable position (dead zone) for building-up of the chloride ions. When the level of chloride ions in the water is low, the
evaporation of water in the crevices leads to chloride ions build-up. Moreover, the high temperature of the transport water
outlet and cooling water inlet results in the acceleration of this building-up. By chloride ions concentration in the crevices,
the pitting corrosion under gasket seat occurs. In addition, the simultaneous presence of chloride and sulfide ions intensifies
the SCC failure in the heat exchanger plates.
5. Recommendations
Since the appearance ofthe cracks in the heat exchangers occurs after cooling the TW outlet by the service water (SW),the
use of higher number of the plates in the heat exchangers together with the higher flow rate of cooling water is strongly
recommended; in this way, at a constant flow rate of transport water, not only the temperature of transport water is
decreased but also the SCC cracks resulted from the direct contact of the service water (which usually contains some levels of
Cl) can be effectively avoided.