1. Introduction
Stress-corrosion cracking (SCC) of austenitic stainless steels has
been a problem in the nuclear industry for many years. The use of
low carbon compositions, such as 304L, have mostly eliminated the
intergranular stress-corrosion associated with chromium depleted
zones at grain boundaries (sensitization) but there remains the
problem of transgranular stress-corrosion cracking (TGSCC). Corrosion appears particularly to be associated with external surfaces
where chloride corrodants are deposited on the surface, temperatures are between ambient and the boiling point of water, and
there is exposure to atmospheric air.
Stress-corrosion cracks have often been regarded as being associated with pitting. Turnbull et al. [1,2] have shown there to be
competition between pitting rates, larger for small pits, and cracking rates, larger for long cracks. At a critical defect length there will
be a transition from pit deepening to crack propagation. Work by
Trethewey et al. [3] showed that the occurrence of pitting was
associated with values of equivalent plastic strain between 10%
and 25% and showed no association with areas of high tensile
residual stress. This confirmed work by Peguet et al. [4] who had
indicated a plastic strain value of 20% for maximum pitting. Recent
work by Turnbull et al. [5], Horner et al. [6] and Turnbull et al. [7]
has shown that the maximum principal tensile stress associated
with a pit is at the base of the pit, whilst the maximum principal
strain is at the pit mouth. In work with a 3NiCrMoV turbine steel
cracks in 26 of 30 cases propagated from the mouth, rather than
the base, of the pit.
Cracks in TGSCC appear crystallographic in nature with clearly
defined slip steps that tend to be along crystallographic planes.
An explanation proposed by Magnin et al. [8] and Chateau et al.
[9,10] is the corrosion enhanced plasticity model (CEPM), which
has been shown experimentally to be consistent with fractographic
evidence [11] of cracked austenitic stainless steel exposed to boiling MgCl2. In the model cracking along a {111} type slip plane will
be activated by the action of a stress normal to the slip plane. Fracture then results by a zig–zig crack growth along alternate {111}
planes producing an overall growth direction of h112i type. Studies on stress-corrosion of single crystal specimens of the 321
austenitic steel by Qiao et al. [12] showed that cracks could both
initiate and propagate in the presence or absence of slip bands.
Overall propagation was always perpendicular to the applied tensile stress. Where high tensile stresses were applied many microcracks would appear, associated with slip bands and propagating
perpendicular to the applied stress. These cracks subsequently coalesced into larger cracks.
The presence of a stress threshold for stress-corrosion on an initially smooth specimen has been suggested by Magnin et al. [8]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.corsci.2014.07.017
0010-938X/Crown Copyright  2014 Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
⇑ Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 (0) 1793 721673.
E-mail addresses: dtspencer@btinternet.com (D.T. Spencer), m.r.edwards@
cranfield.ac.uk (M.R. Edwards), m.wenman@imperial.ac.uk (M.R. Wenman),
pchardtuckey.cmt@nd.da.mod.uk (P.R. Chard-Tuckey).
Corrosion Science 88 (2014) 76–88
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Corrosion Science
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/corsci
and Nishimura and Alyousif [13] but there has been little agreement on what this threshold should be. Current International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) guidance [14] simply states: ‘‘The
stress required for chloride induced TGSCC is relatively modest, the
threshold being close to the proportional limit of solution annealed
austenitic stainless steels’’. This proportional limit will be lower than
any measured proof stress. If the threshold stress intensity
required for the propagation of TGSCC cracks is considered, work
from Jivkov and Marrow [15] proposed using the tensile elastic
strain energy density of grain boundaries over a continuous range
in their model of SCC. Their model also suggested that there was
unlikely to be a physical basis for a threshold stress intensity value,
since crack propagation rates continued to decrease as the stress
intensity decreased.
Tani et al. [16] showed that there was measurable TGSCC at a
temperature of 298 K but it was not clear whether this was a true
threshold or whether cracking could have been seen at lower temperatures in longer experiments.
Work by Turnbull et al. [17] has suggested that SCC of 304
stainless steel was affected by the surface machining and grinding
of the material. They found that cracks originated at corrosion pits
and were more prevalent for longitudinally ground specimens than
for transversely milled or ground specimens. Measurements of surface residual stresses showed the highest tensile stresses to be
associated with ground surfaces and these produced the highest
density of stress corrosion cracks. There was also a surface layer
in the ground and milled specimens which was not resolvable by
electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD), indicating either a heavily cold worked or nanocrystalline structure. This layer was absent
in the transversely dressed specimens, and these did not show
stress corrosion cracks. This work indicates that the surface condition of any austenitic stainless steel undergoing stress-corrosion is
likely to play a part in determining the severity of any cracking that
occurs.
The aim of the present work is to examine the parameters that
control the in-service atmospheric chloride stress-corrosion cracking of 304L, principally temperature, applied stress, plastic strain,
humidity and corrosive environment. Since any experiments are
accelerated tests it is only the severity of the corrosive environment that has been increased in order to produce cracking in days
rather than years.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Materials
The steel used complied with BS EN 10008-2-2005 for grade
1.4307 (304L). The composition was C 0.023, Cr 18.26, Ni 8.01,
Mn 1.23, N 0.066, P 0.029, S 0.004, Si 0.36 (wt%). In the as-received
condition the steel had a 0.2% proof stress of 344 MPa, a tensile
strength of 663 MPa and an elongation to failure of 55%.
2.2. Specimen preparation and test procedure
The material was supplied in the hot-rolled condition and
stress-relieved by heating to 900 C for 30 min in a nitrogen atmosphere. A water quench was used to prevent any possible grain
boundary sensitization. A prior uniaxial plastic strain was then
applied to the specimens by placing them in a servo-hydraulic test
machine, applying a pre-determined stress and then unloading. In
order to separate the effects of the applied prior uniaxial plastic
strain and applied tensile stress on the stress-corrosion cracking,
a bend test geometry was chosen for the stress corrosion tests
and the testpiece geometry is shown in Fig. 1. After annealing
the 0.2% proof stress was 210 MPa and the tensile strength
630 MPa.
The tensile stress in bending (r) can be calculated from:
r ¼ 4Ety
h2 ð1Þ
where h = distance between inner edges of the supports, y = maximum deflection between inner edges of the supports, t = thickness
of the specimen and E = modulus of elasticity.
The specimens were placed in test jigs and a load applied using
a compression spring. The curvature of the specimen was measured using a differential variable reluctance transducer (resolution 0.6 lm, repeatability 1 lm).The value had been previously
calculated for the actual specimen thickness so as to apply a set
bending moment and hence correct upper surface tensile stress.
The spring ensured that, as any crack extends, there will be
increased bending and a reducing load applied. Thus the stress
intensity factor will be increased by the increasing crack length
and decreased by the reducing load, maintaining an approximately
constant stress intensity factor during the cracking process. It is
possible to calculate the exact stress intensity for the case of a single crack [19] but not for the case of multiple cracks. As such the
only stress conditions precisely known are those applying to the
uncracked or very short crack conditions.
The whole assembly was manufactured from 304L plate, except
for the screw thread, hexagonal head screws and wing nuts which
were from 304 stainless steel and the spring from 302 stainless
steel. All this was to prevent any effects of stray galvanic currents
affecting the corrosion.
The specimen gauge length sides were cleaned of oxide and
copper residue from electro-discharge machining manufacture
using 240 grit SiC paper. The upper surface was ground using standard metallographic preparation techniques to a 1200 grit SiC
finish. A range of fixed displacements was applied by a servohydraulic tensile machine. Loads and temperature rises were measured. A fixed displacement rate of 0.1 mm s1 was used (giving a
strain rate of 2  103 s1
). Changes in gauge length and transverse
Fig. 1. Bend test [18] with dimensions (mm) and geometry of bend testpiece.
D.T. Spencer et al. / Corrosion Science 88 (2014) 76–88 77
dimensions were measured using a vernier calliper and micrometer to give actual strain and reduction in area.
The surface was thoroughly degreased and then sprayed with a
saturated solution of MgCl2 in pure ethanol using an airbrush. The
alcohol was evaporated with warm air. This was repeated until a
white deposit of MgCl2 was clearly visible on the surface. Jigs were
then placed in a non-metallic, airtight container with a bubbler
style airlock, electrically isolated from each other. A beaker of saturated ionic salt solution was placed in the container to produce a
fixed humidity point [20] and a data logger for temperature and
humidity installed. The whole system was placed in temperature
controlled oven (±1 C) for three weeks. Samples were inspected
and photographed at regular intervals of 3–4 days.
After the test had completed the samples were inspected for
corrosion and cracking, and if failed completely, the number of
through thickness cracks was recorded. The samples were then
washed in distilled water to remove remaining MgCl2 and any
loose corrosion product. The corroded surface of the sample was
then cleaned of remaining corrosion product using a glass fibre
brush to avoid damaging the surface of the stainless steel and then
given a final clean using propan-2-ol and air drying. The corroded
surface was then video filmed using a digital non-destructive testing (NDT) inspection microscope.
To section the samples a low deformation circular saw was used
fitted with a high density cubic boron nitride disc. This cutting process was heavily lubricated with commercial machining emulsion
to avoid heating and the feed rate was controlled to 2 mm min1 to
minimise deformation of the cut surface. All the samples were sectioned vertically along the gauge length to give a longitudinal section of the centre of the sample. This was designed to cut through
each crack on the central line of the sample. The polished samples
were prepared using the following procedure:
i. 320 grit SiC, 30 N force, 5 min.
ii. 1200 grit SiC, 30 N force, 5 min.
iii. 9 lm diamond, 30 N force, 10 min.
iv. 3 lm diamond, 30 N force, 5 min.
v. 1 lm diamond, 20 N force, 5 min.
vi. Colloidal silica, 15 N force, 30 min.
The number of cracks emanating from the tension face of the
testpiece was counted and the length of each one measured using
an optical microscope. Where a crack subsequently branched after
initiation the maximum length branch was recorded. The lengths
of the cracks were recorded as a percentage of the specimen thickness that was cracked with the actual length calculated from this
and the measured thickness of the specimen. Crack density was
calculated by measuring the distance between cracks and taking
the reciprocal of this distance. Average crack propagation rate
was calculated by dividing the average crack length by the time
of the experiment (usually 500 h), whilst maximum crack propagation rate was calculated by taking the length of the longest crack
and dividing this by the time of the experiment. Average crack
growth rates usually contained between 10 and 50 measurements
and the only cases where less than 10 are used is for the near
threshold (very few cracks) regions. Where average crack growth
rate is reported error bars give the standard error.
2.3. Optical and scanning electron microscopy
Some sections were etched for metallographic examination
using electrolytic 0.1 M nitric acid solution to show general microstructure, tint etched with sodium metabisulphite to show phase
differences or magnetically etched with ferrofluid to distinguish
between martensite types.
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) on both polished surfaces
and fracture surfaces was carried out on a JEOL JS840A microscope
producing secondary electron images (SE) at a potential of 15 kV.
Chemical analysis was carried out by energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDAX), using an attached EDAX Genesis system.
2.3.1. Focused ion beam secondary ion mass spectrometry (FIB-SIMS)
and EBSD
The polished samples were prepared using a StruersTegraForce1/Tegrapol-15 with the following procedure:
i. Grinding with 1200 grit SiC paper for 2 min. If the sample is
heavily corroded a previous one minute step with 800 grit
SiC paper was used.
ii. 2400 grit SiC paper, for 4 min.
iii. 4000 grit SiC paper, for 8 min.
iv. Polishing with OPS (colloidal silica) for 15 min.
v. EBSD requirement finishing was achieved using VibroMet2,
with OPS. This usually took about 8 h.
The FIB-SIMS used for this investigation was a FIB200TEMfei...
The incident beam energy used was 2–30 kV Ga+
, with currents
of 50–3000 pA. If ramp milling was required, the stage was tilted
using the whole range available, 15 to 60. If required pre-tilt
stages were used to increase the tilt (up to 40 and 85). Imaging
was carried out at 1000 pA and 20 kV. Micromachining was carried
out at 20 kV but using many different currents. On average, for
large rough cuts, 1000–5000 pA was used; at the same time currents down to 50 pA were used for the final step of the cutting.
An Auriga Zeiss field emission gun SEM was used for some analysis and this contained FIB, EBSD and EDAX within one vacuum
chamber. High accelerating voltages (20 kV) and large apertures
were used to improve the image qualities and pattern indexing.
EDAX and EBSD were carried out always at 20 kV to collect heavier elements with EDAX or clearer patterns with the EBSD detector. For EBSD a 1 lm step size was used. A large aperture, 120 lm,
was used for large maps, whereas a 60 lm aperture was used for
smaller maps. In the Auriga FIB could only be used as a micromachining tool, with the same specifications reported for the single
beam: it was carried out at 20 kV but using many different currents. On average, for large rough cuts, 1000–5000 pA was used;
at the same time currents down to 50 pA were used for the final
step of the cutting.
The Auriga has a nominal resolution of 5 nm. Images were collected in both backscattered electron (BSE) and SE imaging modes.
For BSE potentials of 1.4–5 kV were used. For SE imaging 5 kV was
used to collect high resolution pictures and 20 kV used when collecting EDAX or EBSD data.
A JSM6400 SEM was used when large maps of EBSD and EDAX
data were required and the level of detail provided by the Auriga
was unnecessary.
2.4. Test plan
With multiple test rigs constructed it was possible to attempt to
measure the influence of applied stress, prior plastic strain, relative
humidity and temperature.
The relative humidity was controlled by the use of beakers of
saturated salt solutions and a number of nominal humidity values
was possible using the following salts [20]. Nominal and measured
humidities are detailed in Table 1.
All temperatures between room temperature and 100 C were
possible with the current test equipment apart from the data loggers, which had a temperature limit of 80 C. Given previous
results the temperatures chosen were 60, 75 and 90 C so as to
cover the range of reactor primary circuit temperatures where
78 D.T. Spencer et al. / Corrosion Science 88 (2014) 76–88
aqueous corrosion is possible and TGSCC has been known to occur,
a threshold of 25 C having been noted previously by Tani et al.
[15].
3. Results
3.1. Measurement of crack propagation rates
The pattern of corrosion is based on multiple parallel cracks
starting from the tension side of the bend test with their opening
perpendicular to the gauge length and growth direction normal
to the applied stress. Examples taken from specimens at 80 h intervals for stresses of 100 and 180 MPa show the same pattern of failure and can be seen in Figs. 2 and 3. A greater degree of bending
can be seen in the more highly stressed specimen in Fig. 3.
3.2. Effect of prior plastic strain
When average crack propagation rate is plotted against the
level of prior plastic strain, Fig. 4, there is a clear effect of the rate
passing through a maximum value at low strains before decreasing
steadily as the strain increases; above 20% no cracking takes place.
This effect is clearer when the maximum rate Fig 4(b) is used
rather than the average and shows that around 1–2% plastic strain
gives the highest propagation rates of around 6 lm h1
.
Similarly, Fig. 4(c), a plot of corrected crack density, also shows
a maximum value for low plastic strains but in this instance the
maximum is at a slightly higher value of strain, around 3% in the
case of 60 MPa stress with a clearly defined peak. At the higher
stress of 120 MPa the effect is much less pronounced with a broad
peak extending from 1% to 9% prior strain.
3.3. Effect of applied stress
When crack propagation rate is plotted against applied tensile
stress, Fig. 5, then it becomes apparent that there is a threshold
Table 1
Nominal [20] and measured relative humidities of saturated salt solutions.
Salt Temperature
(K)
Nominal relative
humidity (%)
Measured relative
humidity (%)
Lithium chloride 323–363 11.1–10.2 11
Magnesium chloride 323–363 30.5–24.1 30
Potassium carbonate 283–303 43.1 45–30
Magnesium nitrate 303–323 51.4–45.4 35
Sodium bromide 328–353 50.1–51.4 48
Sodium chloride 323–353 74.4–76.3 70
Fig. 2. T3-01 composite picture showing corrosion and SCC propagation at
approximately 80 h intervals.
Fig. 3. T3-05 composite picture showing corrosion and SCC propagation at
approximately 80 h intervals.
Fig. 4. Average (a) and maximum (b) crack propagation rates and corrected crack
density (mm1
) (c) as a function of plastic strain for stresses of 60 and 120 MPa,
temperature of 75 C and humidity of 70%.
D.T. Spencer et al. / Corrosion Science 88 (2014) 76–88 79
stress below which no cracking takes place. Above this threshold
the propagation rate increases markedly until a maximum value
is reached. This is again clearer when maximum, Fig. 5(b), rather
than average, Fig. 5(a), rates are used and a threshold of around
10 MPa and maximum propagation rate of 6–7 lm h1 are seen.
The crack density plotted against stress, Fig. 5(c), is less consistent but does show a clear correlation with the crack density
increasing steeply from low stresses (5–10 MPa) and then levelling
out as the maximum propagation rate is reached. There is also an
indication that the higher plastic strain of 10% may give a lower
crack density than at 5% strain.
3.4. Effect of humidity
Below 30% humidity no corrosion, and hence no SCC, took place.
For a stress of 120 MPa and strains of 2% and 5% (Fig. 6) the crack
propagation rates increased from a minimum at 30% humidity to a
maximum at 45% humidity and then reduced to a lower level at
70% humidity. For the lower levels of plastic strain the crack
propagation rates were constant at the lower levels of humidity
and then increased to reach the same rates as the higher levels
of strain by 70% humidity.
At 60 MPa stress (Fig. 7) the effect of humidity was to produce a
less pronounced peak at between 35% and 45% humidity and
occurred at the lower plastic strain levels of 1% and 2%. Maximum
crack growth rates occurred at 70% humidity at 60 MPa. It is also
interesting to note that for 0% plastic strain SCC seems to occur
at a much higher humidity of 70% with little noticeable at 45%
for both stress levels.
3.5. Effect of temperature
In general average cracking rates increased with temperature.
Values of 3.2 ± 0.64, 4.2 ± 0.95 and 8.9 ± 3.0 lm h1 are estimated
at 333, 348 and 363 K respectively where plus–minus refers to
the standard deviations. An estimate of the apparent activation
Fig. 5. Average (a) and maximum (b) crack propagation rates and corrected crack
density (mm1
) (c) as a function of stress for plastic strains of 5% and 10%,
temperature of 75 C and humidity of 70%. Fig. 6. Average (a) and maximum (b) crack propagation rates and corrected crack
density (mm1
) (c) as function of humidity at 120 MPa stress, plastic strains of 0–5%
and temperature of 75 C.
80 D.T. Spencer et al. / Corrosion Science 88 (2014) 76–88
energy for SCC in the temperature range 333–363 K is shown in
Fig. 8. The activation energy for SCC was estimated to be
33.7 kJ mol1
. Both average crack growth rates with temperature
and activation energy are based on measurements of average crack
propagation rates for stresses of 60 and 120 MPa, strains of 2% and
5% and a humidity of 70%. These ranges of values were chosen on
the basis that crack propagation rates did not vary much with plastic strain (Fig. 4) or stress (Fig. 5).
3.6. Metallographic observations, pitting and crack initiation
The microsections were initially prepared as in 2.2. When the
colloidal silica stage was omitted there appeared to be a shadowy
area ahead of the main crack, as seen in Fig. 9a. This area, when
repolished with 1 lm diamond and colloidal silica, revealed a network of very fine cracking as shown in Fig. 9b.
The transgranular nature of the cracking was confirmed by
examination of etched microsections. In the range of plastic strains
principally investigated (0–5%) there was little evidence of martensitic transformation.
An example of a pit blister can be seen in Fig. 10. In the same
micrograph can be seen the initiation site of a crack separate from
the pit blister.
Fig. 7. Average (a) and maximum (b) crack propagation rates and corrected crack
density (mm1
) (c) as function of humidity at 60 MPa stress, plastic strains of 0–5%
and temperature of 75 C.
Fig. 8. Apparent activation energy plot of average crack propagation rate for
temperature range 333–363 K, based on measurements at stresses of 60 and
120 MPa, plastic strains of 2% and 5% and humidity of 70%.
Fig. 9. Optical micrograph of T06-04 (120 MPa stress, 1% plastic strain, 75 C, 70%
humidity) after diamond polishing (a) and colloidal silica polishing (b), showing the
additional fine cracking when further polished with colloidal silica.
D.T. Spencer et al. / Corrosion Science 88 (2014) 76–88 81
Although quantitative analysis of pit formation was not performed it was observed that the extent of pitting increased with
both humidity and temperature. Cracks were initiated through
chains of pits (Fig. 11) but sometimes, especially at lower temperatures and humidities, there was no discernible relationship
between pitting and crack initiation. It was also noted that crack
initiation occurred very early in the tests as seen in Fig. 2 and 3.
3.7. SEM
Results of SEM of a polished and etched sample (Fig. 12) show
the branched cracking typical of SCC as well as confirming the
transgranular nature of the cracking.
A SE image of a crack in specimen T06-02 (0.5% plastic strain,
120 MPa applied stress) with oxidized areas is shown in Fig. 13.
Results of EDAX analysis of oxidized areas are shown in Table 2
and give an average oxygen level in the regions analysed of 60%.
The average Fe/Cr ratio was 2.23 with a standard deviation of
1.18 and for comparison the Fe/Cr ratio as measured by EDAX of
unoxidized areas is 3.63 and from the manufacturer’s specification
3.93
3.8. Focussed ion beam milling
Specimen T02-04 (3.3% plastic strain, 180 MPa applied stress,
<50 h duration) was investigated using FIB milling to micro section
the end of a surface crack in the top surface. This showed multiple
branching and the presence of oxide or another secondary phase in
the crack. This is close to a deformation free investigation technique and shows the true crack geometry at the crack with very little damage of note to the exposed surface when a low beam
current is used. A BSE image of the area close to a crack, showing
dark and light areas is shown in Fig. 14. Elemental analysis of the
dark and light areas can be seen in Table 3, showing the increased
Cr content associated with the dark areas, compared to both light
areas and the bulk composition of the alloy. Dark areas also
showed increased oxygen levels of 15.8 at.% compared to 2.1 at.%.
Fig. 10. Optical micrograph of T06-02 (120 MPa stress, 0.5% plastic strain, 75 C,
70% humidity) showing crack initiation site and pit blister.
Fig. 11. Optical micrograph of T06-04 (120 MPa stress, 1% plastic strain, 75 C, 70%
humidity) showing cracks initiated through chains of pits.
Fig. 12. SE image depicting the grain structure of T06-02 (120 MPa stress, 0.5%
plastic strain, 75 C, 70% humidity) over a crack network.
Fig. 13. SE image of one of the areas of T06-02 (120 MPa stress, 0.5% plastic strain,
75 C, 70% humidity) chosen for oxide analysis.
Table 2
Elemental analysis of oxidized areas (at.%).
Area 1 Area 2 Area 3 Area 4
O 52.8 58.0 70.8 57.4
Fe 28.0 20.3 10.3 21.6
Cr 13.5 6.5 16.5 6.9
Ni 3.2 2.3 1.1 2.1
Mn 0.4
Si 0.7 2.0 0.8 0.3
Cl 1.9 0.5 1.9
C 10.6
82 D.T. Spencer et al. / Corrosion Science 88 (2014) 76–88
A sequence of views of the crack can be seen in Figs. 15 and 16.
Here SE pictures of the crack are shown together with Cl and O elemental maps. Cl appears to be more concentrated over the cracks,
whilst O seems to be more evenly spread over the area analysed. It
is also noted in Fig. 16, top row, that there is a clear Cl signal
(arrowed) branching from the main crack but no equivalent O
signal.
3.9. Electron backscattered diffraction and X-ray diffraction
A Z-inverse pole figure is shown in Fig. 17 together with the
pole figure for 0.5% cold work. These indicate an FCC texture
around both small and large cracks. For small plastic strains
(0–5%) there appears to be a random texture.
X-ray diffraction on a polished sample showed the presence of a
BCC phase, presumed to be martensite, with estimated proportions
as shown in Table 4.
Correlation with other observations, including the EBSD measurements of both electropolished and mechanically polished samples, indicated that there was a deformed layer at the surface of the
samples due to the mechanical polishing processes. This layer was
only exceeded by the underlying deformation due to the tensile
straining when the strain was at a level of 40%. The layer masks
the results at all lower strains.
4. Discussion
4.1. Presence of thresholds
It is of considerable interest to observe the presence of any
thresholds below or above which SCC does not occur. Mayazumi
et al. [21] and Turnbull et al. [17] suggested that there was such
a threshold for the humidity necessary for SCC. In the present work
it can be seen that if the humidity is below the fixed point humidity for the particular corroding species at a given temperature, then
the corroding species will remain dry and not form a solution. For
the MgCl2 used this fixed point humidity is 27% at 75 C [20].
Therefore the corrosion run at 11% humidity showed no cracking
whilst a test at 30% humidity showed cracking. This would indicate
that for a single corroding species the threshold humidity for SCC
to occur can be found from the fixed point humidity for the species
concerned. For sea water which is a complex mixture of chlorides
and sulphates it is the presence of MgCl2 (fixed point humidity
27%) rather than NaCl (fixed point humidity 75%) that will be significant except at higher humidities.
The presence of a stress threshold for SCC in initially smooth
specimens has been suggested by Magnin et al. [8] and Nishimura
and Alyousif [13] but there has been little agreement on what this
threshold should be. In their finite element studies Wenman et al.
[11] assumed a value of 120 MPa perpendicular to the crack propagation direction as providing the best correlation with experimental data. Since they were using a classical finite element
approach and a mesh size larger than any crack tip plastic zone
size, the value was probably an overestimate of the stress required
to produce cracking. Indeed current IAEA guidance [14] states:
‘‘The stress required for chloride induced TGSCC is relatively modest,
the threshold being close to the proportional limit of solution annealed
austenitic stainless steels’’. The onset of microscale plastic deformation occurs at stresses that are considerably lower than the 0.2%
proof stress. In this work, for a plastic strain of 5% and 10%, as seen
in Fig. 5, there is evidence for cracking at an applied stress of
10 MPa and no evidence at a stress of 5 MPa, the 0.2% proof stress
is 210 MPa. It should be noted that cracking could have occurred
with an applied stress of 5 MPa if the test had been continued
beyond 500 h. Thus any suggestion in codes of practice that there
is a stress threshold for initially smooth specimens below which
SCC does not occur is likely to be unwise. Since SCC is a function
of stress intensity rather than stress it would be useful to examine
whether any threshold of stress intensity would apply. Jivkov and
Marrow [15] proposed using tensile elastic strain energy density,
of grain boundaries, over a continuous range in their model of
SCC. Their model also supports the fact there is unlikely to be a
physical basis for either a threshold value of stress intensity for
SCC propagation or a threshold stress for which SCC occurs in initially smooth specimens.
4.2. Effect of stress and plastic strain on SCC rates
A feature of the cracking seen is the presence of many cracks
running perpendicular to the applied stress, forming a series of
parallel cracks propagating through the specimen (Figs. 2 and 3).
This indicates that the crack propagation rate was not increasing
with increasing stress intensity. If crack propagation had been a
strong function of stress intensity, then a longer crack would
always propagate faster than a shorter crack. Increasing stress
beyond 20 MPa (Fig. 5) confirms the small effect of applied stress
level on crack propagation rates.
Fig. 6 shows the effect of strain on cracking rates. These show a
significant increase at low plastic strains (0–2%) with a small
decrease over the range 2–10%. At these low strains there is a considerable work hardening rate and the dislocations created are
mostly glissile. As plastic strain increases dislocations interact
and lock and become sessile. When mechanisms for TGSCC are
considered, the corrosion enhanced plasticity model of Magnin
et al. [8] is dependent on the production of glissile dislocations
on slip planes. Once strains reach a value of around 2% the number
of glissile dislocations remains essentially constant, since with
Fig. 14. BSE image taken from a FIBed slice of a crack in specimen T02-04 (3.3%
plastic strain, 180 MPa applied stress, <50 h duration) showing light and dark
contrast regions of interest adjacent to the crack, which were analysed for chemical
composition.
Table 3
Elemental analysis (at.%) of dark and light areas in Fig. 15.
Dark area Light area
Fe 37.9 58.3
Cr 30.2 18.0
Ni 3.6 5.0
Mn 0.9 1.2
Cl 0.6
Si 0.3
C 10.3 15.5
O 15.8 2.1
S 0.4
D.T. Spencer et al. / Corrosion Science 88 (2014) 76–88 83
increasing strain more of the dislocations become sessile. Fig. 5
shows that strains of 20% or more are associated with an absence
of cracking. At these higher strains there is substantial transformation of the austenite to martensite (Table 4) and this may reduce
the tendency to cracking.
The maximum crack propagation rate is seen at a lower plastic
strain (2%) than that seen in the work of Trethewey et al. [3] who
reported a maximum pit density at plastic strains of 20–25% for a
304L steel with a yield strength of 235 MPa. It should be noted
though that in that case the stress and the plastic strain both varied
spatially making it more difficult to separate the effects.
4.3. Temperature effects
Estimates by Lu et al. [22] suggest apparent activation energies
of 75–107 kJ mol1 for the stress-corrosion cracking of coldworked 316L stainless steel in pressurised pure water in the temperature range of 473–561 K with the suggestion that the activation energy tends to decrease with decreasing temperature. Work
by Andresen [23] has suggested an apparent activation energy of
around 42 kJ mol1 for 304 at low temperatures (<373 K) and
aggressive environments. The estimate of 34 kJ mol1 (Fig. 8) is
consistent with that of [23] in that the specimens are in direct contact with the chloride contaminant thus qualifying as an aggressive
environment. Work by Tani et al. [15] has suggested a threshold
temperature for TGSCC of 298 K. Using the activation energy of
Fig. 8 and the cracking rates of Figs. 5 and 6 suggest a cracking rate
of 0.68 lm h1 at 298 K, a rate that would be difficult to measure in
the time of the present experiments but could be significant for
long term service.
Factors other than the corrosion reaction at the reaction site at
the crack tip may be influenced by temperature as well. The diffusion rate of chemical species such as Cl and O from the surface to
the tip of the crack will increase with increasing temperature.
The rate at which any defect in the protective oxide layer on the
steel is repaired, re-passivation, is increased with increasing temperature. Increased passivation rate with increased temperature
would reduce the crack propagation rate whilst an increased diffusion rate of Cl would increase the crack growth rate.
At low temperature the amount of pitting is small and many
cracks appear to initiate without pitting. As the temperature
increases the amount of pitting increases and more of the cracks
initiate at these pit sites as well as the non-pitted sites. Finally,
at higher temperature there are relatively few non-pitted regions
and the only cracks left are those initiated at pits. At low temperatures and low humidity the cracks propagate at a lower rate and
there are fewer cracks present. Visual observation shows that they
still initiate quickly. This observation is based on the appearance of
linear brown staining features on the specimen surface. The crack
may exist for some time before staining becomes apparent since
this is due to emission of fluid from within the crack forced out
by the expansion of corrosion products on their formation. The
possibility also exists that some of the pitting seen associated with
cracks is actually formed by these seepage fluids and therefore the
crack initiation may arise before the pitting process.
4.4. Initiation of cracks with and without prior pitting
The conditions under which initiation appears to occur without
pitting are those in which the pitting is the least, namely low
Fig. 15. FIBed section of crack in specimen of Fig. 14 – Top to bottom: milled sections of the same crack. Left to right: secondary electron image, chlorine map and oxygen
map.
84 D.T. Spencer et al. / Corrosion Science 88 (2014) 76–88
temperature and humidity. Candidates for possible sites that initiation can take place include the sulphide inclusions that act as the
source for pitting [24,25]. If the propagation rate for cracking is
immediately greater than that for pitting the crack will develop
preferentially and the pitting may be minimal. Other potential sites
are those where slip on {111} planes reach the surface and may
either simply apply a shear stress to the protective oxide film
and cause a local fracture, or where the slip is sufficient to generate
a step in the surface breaking the protective oxide film. In both
cases the fractured oxide film will heal rapidly and the metal
underneath is protected again. In the latter case the slip step
may be sufficient to act as a local stress raiser and increase the
stress intensity in similar manner to a crack.
In these experiments the plastic strain is applied to the specimens long before placing them in the corrosive environment. This
implies that the possibility of any fractures in the protective oxide
film being penetrated by aggressive chemical species before the
test and thereby producing susceptible sites is small. Similarly
the dry chloride film was applied to the specimens after applying
the tensile loading to the specimens so there is little chance of penetration by chloride at this stage.
The surface preparation of the specimens is well known to
affect the susceptibility to both pitting and TGSCC [17], both by
the presence of scratches or similar defects on the surface and by
the introduction of plastic deformation and residual stresses in a
sub-surface layer. The X-ray diffraction results in Table 4 are the
only measurement of these deformations and then only by inference. Since the amount of martensite increases with increasing
plastic strain (all other things being equal) it is possible to say that
the amount of deformation in the surface is only exceeded by the
applied plastic deformation when that strain exceeds a value
between 20% and 40%. This implies a considerably strained layer
(at least 20%) in the surface. This was confirmed by subsequent
problems when attempting EBSD. These indicated surface strains
of roughly equal magnitude in all of the experimental specimens,
apart from the very few high strain tests. From this conclusion it
would appear that, with this specimen preparation method, the
test values of prior plastic strain are swamped by the surface deformation strains. It will be difficult to assess the initiation of cracks
when the 20% or more strain in the surface from grinding and polishing significantly exceeds the 0–5% plastic strain applied afterwards. What this does imply is that the effects measured for
changes to plastic strain are likely to apply almost wholly to the
propagation phase of the cracking process, since the strain in the
surface region controlling initiation is essentially constant.
Where cracking is associated with pitting the cracks tend to
form ‘‘necklaces’’ with a series of pits in a rough line. Where visible
the cracks appear to initiate either side of a pit simultaneously.
Unfortunately there is no depth information available so that the
point of origin around the pit is unknown. Given the shallow nature of the pits in this rolled plate the pits are strongly suggested to
form in a manner similar to that in the previously reported X-ray
tomography work [5,6], namely from the mouth rather than the
base.
Given the high level of deformation in the surface of the specimens, it is perhaps not surprising that sufficient high energy sites
for crack initiation exist even when there are few pits. When pits
are present, however, then it appears that they are generally
Fig. 16. (a) First milled section and (b) second milled section of same crack. Left to right: SE image, chlorine map and oxygen map.
D.T. Spencer et al. / Corrosion Science 88 (2014) 76–88 85
preferred sites for crack initiation, probably because of the stress and
strain distribution around the mouth of a pit as described in [7].
Whilst not yet definitive there are strong indicators that the
degree of plastic strain and/or the presence of stress raisers in
the surface layer can allow TGSCC to initiate without the requirement for any pitting, particularly at low temperatures and
humidity.
4.5. Crack propagation
Crack paths tended to be filled with a compact oxide corrosion
product. SEM microscope examination (Fig. 14) showed that the
crack path was mostly through distinct fractures in this oxide or
at the oxide/metal interface. The sequence of events in crack propagation would appear to be the generation of dislocations along
slip planes to increase the existing density until the level is sufficient for preferential oxidation of the slip planes with high strain
energy and formation of a length of oxide until the length is sufficient for fracture of the oxide segment due to the stress intensity
exceeding the fracture toughness of the oxide.
This idea is similar to that described by Lozano-Perez et al.
[26,27] but it was not possible to confirm the presence of a second
Cr-rich oxide. There are indications that the deformation bands do
not have to be pre-existing, as was the case in their work, but that
any deformation ahead of the crack, whenever formed, may influence the preferential oxidation.
Of significant interest is the lack of any second phases in the
microstructure produced as a result of the crack propagation process. If any martensite is being formed at the crack tips then it is
below the resolution of the EBSD equipment used. The appearance
of martensite in the microstructure is only apparent optically at
around 5% strain and does not seem to have any effect on the
TGSCC process.
The measurement of crack density along the specimens gives an
idea of the spacing between cracks. This latter was typically 1.5–
2 mm and was consistent in any single specimen. On some specimens the cracks were almost as regular as a rule. In a study of
stress distribution around the crack tip Behzad et al. [19] calculated using finite element analysis that this spacing of 2 mm corresponds to the point at which the stress has nearly reduced to the
applied value remote from the crack. If the cracks were any closer
together then the shorter one would be placed in the reduced
stress field either side of the longer one and at some close spacing
the stress intensity could fall below the threshold.
The increased spacing of cracks as the temperature and humidity are reduced may be due to the reduction in suitable initiation
sites since the pitting also is reduced.
Fig. 17. Sample T06-02 (120 MPa stress and 0.5% plastic strain). (a) Inverse pole figure EBSD map around a crack. White areas are positions that cannot be indexed by the
detector, because of high deformation or cracked region and (b) pole figures showing maximum intensity of 5.7 and hence shows an essentially random texture.
Table 4
Phase analysis by X-ray diffraction as function of applied plastic strain.
Plastic strain (%) FCC phase (vol%) BCC phase (vol%)
0 90 10
1 89 11
2 88 12
5 89 11
10 94 6
20 87 13
40 71 29
86 D.T. Spencer et al. / Corrosion Science 88 (2014) 76–88
For corrosion of the slip planes at the crack tips it is necessary
for both oxygen and chloride ions to be transported from the surface to the crack tip. In the case of an atmospheric test there is
almost certainly an excess of oxygen available but the chloride is
limited to that on the surface of the material. It is therefore suggested that the rate limiting factor for TGSCC in crack propagation
is the transport of chloride from the surface to the crack tip. This is
based on the assumption that some, if not all, of the chloride transported becomes incorporated in the oxide corrosion product.
The simplest assumption is that the chloride is transported
from the surface to the crack tip at a constant velocity. This implies
that a chloride ion will take longer to reach the tip of a long crack
than it will for a short one. So in this case the propagation rate
would be inversely proportional to the crack length, a.
rate a a1 ð2Þ
If one were to consider the diffusion gradient along the crack
length then this above equation may be regarded as a maximum.
If the concentration on the surface is regarded as constant and
the concentration at the crack tip is constant (the chloride is consumed as fast as it arrives) then the gradient will be lower for
longer cracks and thus the diffusion rate of chloride will be lower.
This implies a higher inverse power interaction may exist than that
proposed in (2), which can be expressed as:
rate a an with n > 1 ð3Þ
Both of these suggested rate equations imply the same characteristic, namely that the longer a crack is the slower it will propagate.
The implication of this is that shorter cracks will tend to ‘‘catch
up’’ with longer ones. Short side branches will propagate faster than
long ones and this will necessarily produce highly branched crack
systems since this will be favourable. This rate controlling mechanism goes a long way to explaining the morphology of the TGSCC
crack networks and how fifty or more cracks can propagate to near
failure in one short specimen without any single one dominating.
Indeed some specimens at high humidity and high temperature fell
apart into ten or more pieces when removed from the test jig.
If this is true then it is somewhat reassuring that in TGSCC the
defect will tend to propagate slower the longer it is, whereas in
failures like corrosion fatigue the reverse is the case.
5. Conclusions
(a) The threshold humidity for TGSCC to be observed is the relative humidity of a saturated solution of the corrosive medium. In this case, for MgCl2, this will be 30%.
(b) The threshold stress required to initiate TGSCC on an initially smooth specimen within 500 h is substantially below
the measured yield strength of the steel, and can be estimated as 10 MPa.
(c) For fixed values of applied stress the maximum rate of
TGSCC occurred at plastic strains of 1–2%, corresponding to
the maximum number of glissile, rather than sessile,
dislocations.
(d) Estimates of the activation energy (34 kJ mol1
) suggest a
threshold temperature for TGSCC around room temperature.
(e) Pitting was not a necessary condition for TGSCC.
(f) The propagation of TGSCC is suggested to occur by the repetition of three stages, the generation of dislocations on
{111} slip planes, the preferential oxidation of these slip
planes and the subsequent brittle failure of the oxide when
the critical stress intensity is reached.
(g) Cracking occurred with a series of parallel cracks with no
dominant crack suggesting that increased s

