1. Introduction
The SFT, a water-crossing structure that has remained significant research interest from the 20th to the 21st century and holds substantial implementation potential, is the most competitive solution for crossing deep straits, complex seabed geological conditions, and intricate navigation environments Xiang and Yang (2016). For structures with equivalent crossing capabilities, such as immersed tunnels and cross-sea bridges, the immersed tunnel (Wu et al., 2016) offers advantages such as enhanced concealment, high stability, and consistent stress distribution, however, it is highly dependent on seabed conditions, and excessively deep straits or highly unstable seabed conditions can significantly affect its construction difficulty. In contrast, cross-sea bridges that is above-water have the benefits of mature construction techniques (Huang et al., 2019a, 2019b), safe driving conditions, and high aesthetic appeal, but they are sensitive to environmental conditions (Huang et al., 2023; Gong et al., 2024), under extreme wave conditions (Gong et al., 2025; Mi et al., 2025), complex navigation requirements, or environments with high wind loads, the safety of the structure can be significantly impacted (Chen et al., 2024; Chen and Liu, 2005; Huang et al., 2025; Xiang et al., 2025). Therefore, there are great research value in SFT which is rarely affected by the marine environment and geological conditions. But the focus of its research has been changing.
Since Ahrens (1997) proposed the concept of an SFT, there have been a number of studies. Such as the SFT connecting Mexico and California proposed by Faggiano et al. (2016) based on the real environment, intending to use an anchor-type SFT. Then the forces conduct on SFT has been studied such as the study of the affection by dynamic loads such as wave, fluid (Hong and Ge, 2010), marine life or ship collisions, and seismic (Martinelli et al., 2016). Then, Kim and Kwak (2022) studied the influence of different sections of SFT to structural responses under the pressure of regular waves, while Zou et al. (2020) studied the optimal section shape of SFT under typhoon and tsunami actions. And Won et al. (2021a) proposed a SFT with dual-tube cross-section with connecting beams to ensure structural safety, and studied the influence of different arrangements of anchor cables to the response SFT under irregular wave loads.
After years of exploration, the research on the outside of the SFT tends to be full (Iovane et al., 2023), and researchers have gradually shifted their study direction from the outside to the inside, from research to design. The first is the experimental study of the cross-sectional strength of tube and joint (Won et al., 2021b, 2021c), which created scaled models of the tube and joint for SFT by concrete and steel, studied the response under cyclic loadings, concluded that the thickness of the internal steel plate, connection method of joint, and shear key affect the mechanical performance of the joint. The second is the study of the joint stiffness such as the matrix transfer method with the joint stiffness proposed by Gao et al. (2022) for analysis of the dynamic response of SFT under vehicle loads, where the joints were simplified to bending springs. The results showed that the bending stiffness of the joint had a significant impact on the displacement of SFT. And optimal ratios of joint stiffness to tube leading to higher comfort and greater economic efficiency studied by Hou et al. (2024), finding that the joint stiffness influenced the dynamic response such as acceleration, displacement, and bending moment. Moreover, the concept of prestress adjustment of anchor cables in cable-stayed bridges (Straupe and Paeglitis, 2013) is also applied to anchor cables of SFT and the research has also demonstrated that under appropriate prestress configurations of anchor cable (different initial stiffness of the anchor cables), a uniform internal force distribution can be achieved, leading to the full utilization of construction materials and a more gradual displacement curve (Chen et al., 2023).
The aforementioned studies indicate that the stiffness of the tubes, the joints, and the anchor cables of SFT significantly influence the structural response and the safety and comfort for passage. But the obvious problem is that the three variables are independent of each other, unrelated, and not systematic for design. Such as the existing methods for prestress design of anchor cable are predominantly post-design optimization approaches. Thus, there is an urgent need for a method that directly and rationally completes the systematic design of the stiffness of SFT components.
This study aims to develop a method for SFT designs that meets the requirements of railway traffic, which is a design specification with high requirements (Montenegro et al., 2021). In the section 2, the SFT model simplified by the segmentation analysis method and displacement method, and proposed a design theory for stiffness of the tubes, anchor cables, and joints that satisfies the criteria for railway traffic. Building upon this foundation, section 3 discusses several design variables, refining the design theory. In the section 4, the proposed design method is applied to a prospective SFT project, verifies its effectiveness.
2. Design methodology and model validation
2.1. Model simplification and basic assumption
This study proposed a simplified model of SFT under segmentation analysis method and matrix displacement method (the tube of SFT be seen as a beam with axial and shear displacement neglected and the anchor cables were seen as springs) (Chen and Liu, 2005; Long et al., 2018; Ling et al., 2018), which solve the problem of designing tubes, cables, and joints, as they are numerous and inter coupled, making it difficult to complete the stiffness design of all three simultaneously. The matrix displacement method can be described by Eq. (1) and Eq. (2):
(1)
(2)
where [K] represents the stiffness matrix; {x} represents the displacement of each beam end; {R} represents the end moments at each beam by {x}; {M} represents the moment of beams; {M`} represents the moment generated by {x}; {Mp} represents the moment caused by external force.
The segmentation analysis method is carried out by dividing the SFT along the span direction of the SFT, ultimately achieving the stiffness collaborative design of tubes, cables, and joints in SFT. The following assumptions are given:
1.
With the exception of the revetment tube, the mid tube can be segmented either between two groups of cables or at the location where one group of cable is divided into two, as illustrated in Fig. 1, Fig. 3.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (182KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Internal forces in symmetrical cross-section of tube.

2.
Following segmentation, symmetrical forces are exerted on both sides of the segments (Hou et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024).
3.
After segmentation, a state of force balance can be achieved between the independent tube segment and the cable connected to it under external forces, as shown in Fig. 5.
The above assumptions are from the existing dynamic response studies of SFT, it has been observed that tubes are primarily categorized into asymmetric internal force tubes in the revetment tubes and symmetric internal force tubes in the midspan (Hou et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024). In the symmetric cross-sections of tubes with symmetric internal forces, the shear forces are relatively small but opposite in direction (Fq1 = -Fq2≈0 N), the axial forces are equal in magnitude but opposite in direction and relatively small (Fax1 = -Fax2≈0 N), and the bending moments are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction (M1 = -M2), as shown in Fig. 1.
Furthermore, SFT are expected to possess substantial spanning capabilities in their application scenarios, necessitating a great overall length (Kanie, 2010; Jakobsen, 2010; Faggiano et al., 2016). Consequently, the number of segments in an SFT will increase with the overall length under the limitations on the strength of the material. This indicates that the segmentation analysis method proposed in this paper is highly feasible, as the midspan tubes with symmetric internal forces are less affected by adjacent tubes and the number of midspan tubes is greater than the revetment tubes.
2.2. Design methodology
The overall design process, utilizing the segmentation analysis method, is illustrated in Fig. 2. The stiffness design of SFT is divided into three components: tube, cable, and joint. Following the application of the segmentation analysis method, the designed stiffness of the tube is initially determined based on the maximum mid-span displacement limitation for a single span. Subsequently, considering both the full-span maximum displacement limitation and external forces acting on each tube segment, the stiffness of anchor cables at different positions can be obtained. Finally, axial, shear, bending, and torsional stiffness of joints are sequentially designed. Further details are provided below.
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (603KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Flowchart of SFT stiffness design under Segmentation analysis method.

Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (279KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Segmentation analysis method for SFT.

Initially, the SFT is divided into revetment tube segments and midspan tube segments at middle of the adjacent anchor cables. As shown in Fig. 3, by applying static or dynamic loads p(x) to the SFT (Haung et al., 2024), the forces fi(p) acting on the anchor cables are obtained (as Eq. (3)). Combining these forces with the designed displacement function gi(x) for the segments and subtracting the deflection δtube of a single tube, the nodal displacement Δi (as Eq. (4) and Eq. (5)) is determined, which in turn yields the required stiffness for the anchor cables at each cable positions. Ultimately, the stiffness design value Kc,i for the anchor cables is derived from their relationship with vertical stiffness, as expressed in Eq. (6) (Huang et al., 2024). Here, δtube should be less than the maximum deflection limit for a single tube, and the maximum nodal displacement ΔL/2 at the midspan should be less than the maximum deflection limit for overall SFT.
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
where fi,side(x) represents the force experienced by the cables connected to the revetment tube segment. This force is influenced by the mode of connection between the tunnel and the ground. When the segment is hinged to the ground, Cside set at 9/8 by displacement method; fi,mid(x) represents the force in the anchor cables linked to the midspan tube segments; s represents the distance between the anchor cables; kc,i represents the axial stiffness of the cables, with the calculation formula Eq. (6); qH,V represents the vertical or horizontal load on the tube; Ec represents modulus of elasticity of the cables; Ac represents cross-sectional area of the cables; lc represents the length of the cables; α represents the angle between the cables and the ground.
Due to the presence of limitations θMax on the rotation of beam end (Montenegro et al., 2021), in SFT, this can be corresponded to rotation at the end of tubes θTube (calculated by displacement method, as Eq. (7)) and relative rotations between the two tubes at joint (2θTube). Consequently, the relationship of design limitations, mechanical properties of the tube and joint, and rotation caused by the first anchor cables θCable,1 can be formulated by Eq. (8). Take into account extreme working conditions, assuming that the bending stiffness of the joint is 0 N/m, the mechanical properties EIH,V of the tube and the minimum vertical displacement ΔH1,V1of the first anchor cables is obtained by Eq. (9).
(7)
(8)
(9)
where KJH,JV represents the vertical or horizontal stiffness of joint.
Subsequently, upon completion of the design for the tubes, anchor cables, and joint bending stiffness, it is imperative to proceed with the design of the axial, shear, and torsional stiffness of the joint. Under static load and dynamic load, the axial stiffness Ku has a negligible impact and its value is determined by the required compression of the GINA gasket. Consequently, its design value should align with the working stiffness ku of the GINA gasket influenced by the radius RGINA, as Eq. (10) (Zou et al., 2022).
(10)Ku = 2πRGINAku
However, the water tightness of GINA gasket is influenced by displacement (Xiao et al., 2015) in the operation of the joint, which necessitates a design approach that minimizes shear deformation and shear forces within the joint. Placing the joint in a location free from shear forces is ideal, however, the positions where shear forces are minimized are changes with variations in loading. Consequently, a novel method of cable placement, which involves dividing a group of anchor cables into two adjacent groups (area is halved) and situating the joint amidst them, has been proposed and explored in subsection 3.2 (as shown in Fig. 4). This method theoretically achieves a state of minimal shear forces and can maintain a zero displacement and shear force of joint even dealing with unequal tube lengths.
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (222KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Different placement method of joint and cables.

Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (88KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Simplified model of segmented tube with joint.

Then, the simplified model for the design of joint bending stiffness considers only a single tube segment, assuming that the adjacent tubes are similar in internal forces conditions and symmetrical with respect to the anchor cables (as shown in Fig. 5). KJ represents the bending stiffness of the joint, while KJ' denotes the bending stiffness of half a joint, and their relationship is expressed in Eq. (11). KC is the vertical stiffness of a group of anchor cables, and q represents the total vertical force acting on the SFT. Using the displacement method, make the moment M1 at the structural end equated to the average of the absolute values of positive and negative moments, given by ql2/16, in Eq. (12). This theoretically yields the optimal joint bending stiffness that maintains consistency between the maximum absolute values of positive and negative moments of the tube, as shown in Table 1.
(11)
(12)
(13)
Table 1. Bending moment under different ratio of joint stiffness.

KJ	+ꝏ	3EI/l
Bending moment under different ratio of joint stiffness to tube	Image 1	Image 2
When the bending stiffness of the joint approached infinity, the tube is continuous without joints, and when the bending stiffness of the joint is 6EI/l (total of 3EI/l, in Eq. (13)), the moment for a single tube is presented in Table 1. Therefore, setting the joint bending stiffness to greater than or equal to 3EI/l will result in a more uniform bending moment of the tube, aligning with the conclusion of Hou et al. (2024). This implies that the method can be employed to optimize the joint bending stiffness for a more uniform bending moment distribution.
Ultimately, the torque and torsional deformation of the SFT and joint are attributed to the horizontal displacement and joint horizontal deformation, respectively (Huang et al., 2024). In the design of shear stiffness, the vertical stiffness is designed, yet the horizontal stiffness is equivalent to the vertical stiffness (because of the same shear area and elastic modulus), and the horizontal loads and displacements experienced by the joint are usually lesser (Hou et al., 2024). Therefore, in the torsional stiffness design, it is assumed that the joint undergoes a horizontal displacement that reaches the design limitation. Subsequently, the minimum torsional stiffness Kθ of the joint is determined through the torque Fθ calculation formula derived from the limitation of horizontal displacement Δh,Design and torsional displacement Δθ,Design by Eq. (14) (Huang et al., 2024) and Eq. (15).
(14)
(15)
where KJ,Shear is the shear stiffness of joint; the r is the radius of joint; α is the installation angle of cables; β is the inclination angle of cables.
2.3. Model validation
To determine the design method proposed in subsection 2.1, a finite element model is established using ABAQUS 2020 software. Due to the lack of practical engineering background of SFT, the structural parameters of SFT have not been standardized. Therefore, the SFT model parameters used in this study which refers to several existing researches (Xiang and Yang, 2017, 2018; Lin et al., 2018, 2019; Yang et al., 2021; Hou et al., 2024; Xue et al., 2025; Cui et al., 2025) are shown in Table 2.
Table 2. Parameters of SFT model with considering of joint in this study.

Component	Parameter	Value	Units
Tube	Total length	2000	m
Element length	100	m
Outer diameter	15	m
Wall thickness	1	m
Buoyancy to gravity ratio (BWR)	1.3	–
Young's modulus	3.45E+10	Pa
Poisson's ratio	0.18	–
Anchor cable	Length	180	m
Diameter	0.347	m
Young's modulus	1.95E+11	Pa
Inclination angle	π/3	rad
Installation angle	π/3	rad
Interval	100	m
Environment	Water depth	200	m
Submerged depth	40	m
In the model (as shown in Fig. 6), the concrete tube is simulated using beam elements (B31), and the steel anchor cables are simulated using truss elements (T3D2). The MPC/BEAM is used for the connection between the tube and the corresponding anchor cable (as shown in Fig. 7 (a)).
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (210KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. FEM model of SFT.

Fig. 7
Download: Download high-res image (310KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. The connection of cables to tube (a) and mechanical properties of joint (b) considered in SFT model.

In this model, both ends of SFT are hinged (imposed rotational restriction), resilient connected, or fixed to ground, the end of anchor cable hinged to ground and the other end are hinged on the installation location of the tube by the MPC/BEAM connection, the anchor cables are arranged on the end or mid of each tube, and the joint are arranged between tubes. Each joint is simulated in six degrees of freedom (DOFs) including axial stiffness, shear stiffness (horizontal and vertical), bending stiffness (horizontal and vertical) and torsional stiffness springs (as shown in Fig. 7 (b)).
The establishment of the SFT model and the effectiveness of the joint simulation method in different loads were verified in early work of Hou et al. (2024). Meanwhile, to verify the accuracy of the application method of prestress used in this study, a finite element model based on ABAQUS 2020 was established, consistent with the method of Chen et al. (2023) and incorporating joints. Under constant load, the prestress was added with the anchor cable, and by comparing with the model of Chen et al. (2023) the prestress application method of the proposed model is accurate (as shown in Fig. 8). Finally, the verification of the design method is presented in subsection 3.1 and in Fig. S1 and Fig. S2.
Fig. 8
Download: Download high-res image (300KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Comparison of envelope curve of the vertical displacement (a) and vertical moment (b) with prestress of cable under this method and under Chen’ method.

3. Different variables for design
There are still important variables to be discussed with the design methods proposed in section 2, such as Envelop carve of vertical displacement, Situation of joints and cables, Design or optimization of cables, and Boundary conditions. In order to minimize the influence of other variables, this section focuses solely on the design and research based on the limitation of vertical displacement. Data such as displacement and internal forces of half an SFT (the other half being symmetrical) are extracted for analysis.
3.1. Envelop carve of vertical displacement
Under the design standard (Montenegro et al., 2021) (maximum deflection of SFT: L/4000; tube: l/4000), this subsection explores the impact of different functional curves of displacement for design on the SFT response to select appropriate displacement design curves under varying loads The displacement curve of beam under uniform load is always a power function (Chen and Liu, 2005; Long et al., 2018), so the power function is used as the displacement curve of SFT in this part. Taking the one side of SFT as the origin and the direction towards the other side as the positive X-axis, the vertical upward direction as positive V-axis. The power function used in this subsection research is:
(16)
As shown in Fig. 9 and Fig. S1, it can be observed that this design method exhibits strong control over the displacement of the SFT, with the structural displacement curves predominantly reaching the specified positions on the design curve. However, when the power (k) of the power function is greater than 0 but less than 1, the deformation of the SFT at the midspan gradually becomes tapered, resulting in a significant bending moment at the midspan (as depicted in Fig. 10). SFT possessing a strong resistance to bending, leading to the SFT does not achieve the designed maximum displacement, simultaneously result in a reduction in the maximum midspan displacement. When the k is 0, the displacement values at each control point are identical, and the stiffness of each anchor cable is the same, resulting in similar maximum displacements for each tube and the maximum positive bending moment being induced in the revetment tube because of the hinged boundary. When the k is greater than 1, both the deformation and bending moment of the SFT are comparatively smooth, and at the case k is 2, the bending moment is most uniform, making it suitable as the displacement design curve for static load. It is noteworthy that as k increases, the structural displacement and bending moment gradually become similar to the condition where k is 0, hence the displacement design curve function should not be excessively plump.
Fig. 9
Download: Download high-res image (312KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Comparison of vertical displacement (V) under different design envelop curve.

Fig. 10
Download: Download high-res image (837KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 10. Bending moment of SFT under different design envelop curve.

To assess the applicability of this method to SFT design under dynamic load, the wave force exerted on the SFT under dynamic load (wave height 7 m, period 12.69 s) was calculated (Hou et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024) and applied into the model. Based on the design method previously described, an appropriate distribution of anchor cables stiffness was designed. The SFT was subjected to self-weight, buoyancy, and time-varying wave loads. Upon reaching a steady state, the maximum displacement envelope and maximum-minimum bending moment envelope within one cycle were extracted. As shown in Fig. 11, SFT reaches steady state after 30 s under wave loads.
Fig. 11
Download: Download high-res image (449KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 11. Response of vertical displacement (V) of SFT under wave forces in a steady state cycle.

As shown in Fig. 12, Fig. S2, and Fig. 13, the dynamic response results indicate that the design method of SFT stiffness also applicable to the SFT under dynamic load, and it can be observed that the displacement trend is like that under static load. However, due to the potential energy associated with the motion of SFT during periodic vibrations, the maximum force exerted on the SFT within one period is greater than that of the calculated load, leading to a greater displacement that slightly exceed the design limitations (not exceeded when k is 1/3 or 1). In response of bending moment of tube, the positive bending moment is extremely high when the k is 0, while in the case of k between 0 and 1, the bending moment distribution is more uniform. When the k exceeds 1, the bending moment tend changes from greater negative moments to larger positive moment. Moreover, when the k is excessively large or the displacement curve is overly plump, it will result in the same response as the case of k is 0. Therefore, under dynamic loads, the exponent of the function should be within the range of 0 and 2 for optimal performance, ensuring displacement control while also considering a favorable bending moment performance.
Fig. 12
Download: Download high-res image (292KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 12. Maximum of vertical displacement (V) of SFT under wave forces in a steady state cycle.

Fig. 13
Download: Download high-res image (538KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 13. Response of vertical moment (Mv) of SFT under wave forces in a steady state cycle.

3.2. Situation of joints and cables
This subsection investigates the influence of differences in the relationship between joint and anchor cable placement on the shear force at the joint. The study considers three cases where the 10th anchor cable is removed (as shown in Fig. 14(a)), the 7th and 13th anchor cables are removed (as shown in Fig. 14(b)), or the 5th, 10th, and 15th anchor cables are removed to simulate various conditions of anchor cables cannot be laid on the too deep parts of the seabed (as shown in Fig. 14(c)) and the stiffness of the tubes is increased to meet the maximum deflection requirement of tube. The performance of the design method under static and dynamic loads is compared in the three cases that cable placement variations.
Fig. 14
Download: Download high-res image (208KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 14. Three cases of cable placements.

As shown in Fig. 15(a) names the case where the joint is placed at the midpoint of the adjacent cable as "JT-number of cables removed", and Fig. 15(b) names the case where the joint is placed at the anchor cable location, divided one cable into two adjacent groups of cables (area is halved) with the joint placed between them, as "JJ-number of cables removed". To minimize the influence of other factors, the vertical displacement design curve adopts a power function with power is 2. Other parameters are the same as previously.
Fig. 15
Download: Download high-res image (491KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 15. Shear force of joint under static load (a) and dynamic load (b).

When the joint is placed between anchor cables, due to variations in tube length, the point where the structural shear force is 0 N does not occur at the mid of tube, leading to a high joint shear force, as shown in Fig. 15. Moreover, when the joint is placed at the location of anchor cable, variations in tube length can be controlled by proportionally increasing the stiffness of the divided cables, achieving minimum displacement of joint. Placing the joint at the location of anchor cable can significantly reduce the shear forces experienced at the joint compared to when the joint is located between the anchor cables. Under static load conditions, the maximum reduction in shear force can reach 40.4 %, while the maximum shear force at the joint of the first segment can be reduced by up to 61.5 %.
The joint can achieve a stiffness of 7.7 GN/m under case of smaller shear key (Hou et al., 2024), and the minimum required stiffness for the two placement cases under joint vertical displacement restriction is 2.45 GN/m and 17.7 GN/m under a constraint of 3 mm maximum vertical shear deformation of joint, respectively. The method of placing the joint and group of anchor cables at the same location is more feasible than the method where the joint is located between the group of anchor cables, as well as the extreme condition method proposed by Hou et al. (2024). Moreover, under the method of placing the joint and group of anchor cables at the same location make the tubes can bear loads independently, transforming the structure from a transient to a more stable configuration, which is also safer in practical erection constructions.
3.3. Design or optimization of cables
In the studies of Chen et al. (2023); Straupe and Paeglitis (2013), cable force adjustment is identified as an important approach to optimizing the deformation and internal force of the SFT and bridges, which is the method of design first and then optimizing the prestress of anchor cables. After applying the same anchor cable to the whole SFT, they appropriately increase the corresponding anchor cable prestress at the position with larger bending moment or displacement to obtain better bending moment and displacement performance, but there is no quantification process, and only "the cable force is relatively uniform and the supporting reaction of the revetment tube is reduced as far as possible" is taken as the goal. Therefore, the design method proposed in this study allows for the direct design of the anchor cables, eliminating the need for an optimization process and thereby enhancing the efficiency and controllability of the design of anchor cables for SFT. Therefore, the structural response of the SFT under static or dynamic loads are studied using the proposed stiffness design method and the cable prestress optimization method presented by Chen et al. (2023), to explore the differences in the two methods.
The model parameters used in this subsection are listed in Table 3. Based on the results summarized in subsection 3.1, a power function with power equal to 2 is employed as the design curve of vertical displacement under the static load, while a power function with power equal to 1 is used as the design curve of vertical displacement under dynamic load.
Table 3. Parameters of SFT model in Chen et al. (2023).

Component	Parameter	Value	Units
Tube	Total length	1000	m
Element length	100	m
Outer diameter	15	m
Wall thickness	1	m
BWR	1.607	–
Young's modulus	3.45E+10	Pa
Poisson's ratio	0.18	–
Anchor cable	Length	235	m
Young's modulus	1.95E+11	Pa
Inclination angle	π/3	rad
Interval	100	m
Environment	Water depth	250	m
Submerged depth	40	m
Under the static load, the deformation and bending moment performance of the SFT are depicted in Fig. 16. It can be observed that, the case with the design method exhibited smaller deformation and more uniform bending moment distribution compared to the prestressed cable condition under the same displacement constraint of SFT, and the maximum bending moment of SFT reduced by 20.5 % at Chen et al. (2023). For SFT with a symmetrical cross-section, the closer proximity of the maximum absolute values of positive and negative bending moments is beneficial for the structural stress and material strength design (Xu et al., 2023). Under the two methods, the ratio of the absolute values of positive and negative bending moments is 1.84 and 5.89, respectively.
Fig. 16
Download: Download high-res image (358KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 16. Comparison of vertical displacement (a) and moment (b) with applied prestress of anchor cables under Chen’ method and changed stiffness of cable under this study.

To delve deeper into the differences between the two methods, the dynamic load (wave height 7 m, period 12.69 s) was applied into both cases, and the responses of displacement and bending moment were compared. As shown in Fig. 17, it can be observed that the displacement of SFT is larger under the prestressed anchor cable case, both in the horizontal and vertical directions. This is since the stiffness of cables in Chen et al. (2023) is greater than the cable stiffness in the latter. Under the same increase in loads, produces a smaller displacement and demonstrates better resistance to deformation under bigger stiffness. Thus, the maximum midspan displacement is also smaller under the condition with Chen et al. (2023), showcasing superior displacement control capabilities.
Fig. 17
Download: Download high-res image (242KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 17. Comparison of vertical displacement (a) and vertical moment (b) with applied prestress of cable under Chen’ method and changed stiffness of cable under this study.

As shown in Fig. 18, under both cases, the maximum vertical bending moment values are close to each other, but the difference lies in the fact that the positive bending moment is larger and the negative bending moment is smaller under this study, whereas Chen et al. (2023) exhibits a closer proximity between the absolute values of maximum positive and maximum negative bending moment. Under the response of horizontal bending moment, the maximum moment under Chen et al. (2023) is greater than this study, which because of the vibration amplitude at the revetment tube is larger under this study (as shown in Fig. 17). In Chen et al. (2023), the bending moment grows gradually from the revetment tube to the midspan tubes, which is attributed to the smaller anchor cable stiffness at the midspan location, resulting in a significant response under dynamic loads. In summary, the method proposed in this study can bring better displacement and internal force responses, and offers more controllability. It provides valuable guidance for the design and application of actual engineering projects of SFT.
Fig. 18
Download: Download high-res image (494KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 18. Comparison of moments with prestressed cable (a, c) and stiffness designed cable (b, d) under Chen’ method and changed stiffness of cable under this study.

3.4. Boundary conditions
To investigate the impact of boundary conditions on the design method, the study of subsection 3.4 extended the model in subsection 3.3 to incorporate boundary conditions as variables, introducing fixed and elastic connection boundary conditions. The applicability of the proposed design method was studied under varying the boundary conditions. The concept of elastic connection boundary condition has been explored in the works of Gao et al. (2022) and Park et al. (2022) which analyses of displacement and internal force responses under different loads were conducted. Following the above researchers, the stiffness of the elastic boundary connection kbound (bending stiffness) was set to 1/200 of the tube stiffness EITube.
Due to the restriction of bending at revetment tube, the response of displacement and bending moment reveal that boundary conditions significantly affect the revetment tube. As shown in Fig. 19, under the fixed condition, the vertical bending moment is extremely large even leading to downward deflection deformation that usually upward. In contrast, under the elastic boundary connection case, the bending moment exhibits greater uniformity, and the displacement is less than that under hinged conditions and greater than that under fixed. Furthermore, when the stiffness of the elastic connection boundary is greater, the result is closer to the fixed boundary condition; when the stiffness of the elastic connection boundary is smaller, the result is closer to the hinged boundary, as shown in Fig. S3.
Fig. 19
Download: Download high-res image (383KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 19. Vertical displacement (a) and bending moment (b) of SFT under different boundary.

The restraining capability of elastic boundary connection on the SFT is weaker than that of fixed conditions. Consequently, under dynamic responses, larger potential energy and a greater maximum displacement are generated. As shown in Fig. 20, the elastic connection produces a slightly larger displacement at the 200 m–400 m position in the vertical displacement response, with an overall trend consistent. In the horizontal displacement response, however, a larger horizontal displacement is observed at the midspan of the SFT under elastic connection conditions. This phenomenon is attributed to the vertical wave force is approximately 0.25 times the remaining buoyancy, which makes the response of SFT same as that under static load, thus the difference in vertical displacement responses is smaller than that in horizontal displacement responses. Under dynamic loads, the trend of bending moment response is like that under static loads, with significant changes occurring at the revetment tube, especially under fixed conditions, as shown in Fig. 21. And the influence of elastic connection boundaries with different stiffnesses on displacement and bending moment is similar to that under static loads, as shown in Fig. S4 and Fig. S5. In summary, the change in boundary conditions has a significant impact on the bending moments of the revetment tubes and on the displacement response of the midspan tubes.
Fig. 20
Download: Download high-res image (257KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 20. Vertical (V) and horizonal (H) displacement of SFT under different boundary conditions.

Fig. 21
Download: Download high-res image (566KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 21. Vertical and horizonal bending moments of SFT under different boundary conditions.

4. Application
4.1. Preliminary design
Martire et al. (2010) performed dynamic response calculations under earthquake for a SFT project in the Mediterranean Sea, specifically in the Messina Strait. The model used was a scaled axial model of the 3000m full length. In this study, a full-scale design for the SFT project across the Messina Strait was designed. Initially, based on the terrain map (Martire et al., 2010), the positions of anchor cables and the submerged depth of the SFT were determined, as shown in Fig. 22. Here, lC1 is the distance of the midspan tubes to the seabed (with a length of cables l1 = 235 m); lC0 is the distance of the revetment tubes to the seabed (with a length of cables l0 = 142 m); S1 is the length of the mid-span tubes (S1 = 100 m); and S0 is the length of the revetment tube (S0 = 150 m). According to existing research (Xiang and Yang, 2017, 2018; Lin et al., 2018, 2019; Yang et al., 2021; Hou et al., 2024), a submerged depth of 40 m, a BWR of 1.3, and a total length of the SFT at 2900 m can be assumed, with specific parameters listed in Table 4.
Fig. 22
Download: Download high-res image (230KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 22. The seabed and SFT designed at Messina strait.

Table 4. Parameters of SFT model designed for Messina strait.

Component	Parameter	Value	Units
Tube	Total length	2900	m
Side element length	150	m
Mide element length	100	m
BWR	1.3	–
Anchor cable	Length of side cable	235	m
Length of mid cable	142	m
Young's modulus	1.95E+11	Pa
Inclination angle	π/3	rad
Installation angle	π/3	rad
Interval	100	m
Environment	Water depth	250	m
Submerged depth	40	m
Water density	1000	kg/m3
The Messina Strait lies within the Mediterranean Sea, where it was found that the mean wave height is 3 m, with a period of 12.69 s (Hou et al., 2024). Therefore, the wave load, gravity, and buoyancy under these sea conditions were calculated by potential flow theory (Huang et al., 2024), the wave forces on the SFT are as shown in Fig. 23. It can be observed that the horizontal and vertical wave forces experienced by the SFT are of similar magnitude, while the vertical direction forces also include the remaining buoyancy (an order of magnitude greater than both). Therefore, the vertical deformation of the tube is considered the primary design criterion, which can also satisfy the displacement requirements in the horizontal direction (can be verified below in Fig. 26).
Fig. 23
Download: Download high-res image (212KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 23. Horizonal and vertical wave forces under wave height is 3 m and wave period is 12.69 s.

4.2. Design and result
In the work of Montenegro et al. (2021), relevant restrictions for the safe operation of the railway traffic were proposed, with the safety standards for the railway at a speed of 200 kM/h listed in Table 6. Based on the restrictions, the outer diameter, thickness of wall,and Young's modulus used is referenced from several existing researches (Xiang and Yang, 2017, 2018; Lin et al., 2018, 2019; Yang et al., 2021; Hou et al., 2024), the vertical deflection of a single tube meets the requirements by Eq. (5) (0.01395 m < 100 m/4000). The required vertical stiffness for each anchor cable support point was determined by Eq. (3) and Eq. (4), as shown in Fig. 24, and the required cross-sectional area of the anchor cables was then calculated based on the lengths and angles of the different positions by Eq. (6). Since the forces experienced by the joint were minimal by Eq. (7), Eq. (10), Eq. (15), leading to an excessively small joint stiffness according to the proposed design method, the shear, axial, torsional stiffness, and the bending stiffness determined by the bending moment optimization method of this study were referenced along with the discussions in subsection 3.1 and the lower limit recommendations for joint stiffness from existing research (Hou et al., 2024), as shown in Table 5. The stiffness of the elastic connection at the shoreline segment was set to kbound = EITube/330.
Table 5. The stiffness of joint and tube (ratio of joint to tube).

Component	Axial stiffness (GN/m)	Shear stiffness (GN/m)	Bending stiffness (GN·m)	Torsional stiffness (GN·m)
joint	247(16.4 %)	37.8(6.2 %)	2.3E+6(330 %)	1154(3.8 %)
tube	1510	606	37346	29877
Table 6. Criterions of SFT and results calculated from the designed model.

Variables	Static load	Dynamic load	Criterion	Judgement
Maximum horizontal and vertical displacement at the midspan (m)	0.706	0.649	L/4000 = 0.725	Satisfied
Maximum horizontal and vertical deflection at the mid tubes (m)	0.00270	0.00617	L1/4000 = 0.025	Satisfied
Horizontal and vertical deflection at the revetment tube (m)	0.00782	0.00110	L0/4000 = 0.0375	Satisfied
Maximum vertical rotation at the end of the tube (rad/1000)	0.00132	0.00427	4	Satisfied
Maximum horizontal rotation at the end of the tube (rad/1000)	–	0.00629	2	Satisfied
Maximum vertical deformation at the joint (mm)	0.0660	0.0108	3	Satisfied
Maximum horizontal deformation at the joint (mm)	–	0.00238	10	Satisfied
Maximum torsional deformation at the joint (rad/1000)	–	0.0259	0.5	Satisfied
Maximum horizontal acceleration (m/s2)	–	0.107	0.18	Comfortable
Fig. 24
Download: Download high-res image (133KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 24. Vertical stiffness of group of cables under different loads.

As shown in Fig. 25 and Table 6, under the designed stiffness of the tubes, anchor cables and joints, it meets a variety of requirements and obtains a relatively uniform bending moment. As shown in Fig. 26, consistent with the analysis in Section 3.1, using a power function with the power equal to 1 as the vertical displacement design curve under dynamic loads results in a reduction in the maximum midspan displacement than designed and the generation of larger bending moments (Fig. 27), ensuring a sufficient displacement allowance for the SFT under dynamic loads and providing better control.
Fig. 25
Download: Download high-res image (280KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 25. Vertical displacement and vertical bending moment of SFT under static load.

Fig. 26
Download: Download high-res image (183KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 26. Maximum vertical and horizonal displacement of SFT under dynamic load.

Fig. 27
Download: Download high-res image (369KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 27. Maximum vertical (a) and horizonal (b) bending moment of SFT under dynamic load.

Finally, as shown in Table 6, it can be seen that the design method proposed in this study has high feasibility and applicability.
5. Conclusions
This paper presents a novel design method for the stiffness of SFT based on the segmentation analysis method and displacement method. The main findings of this study can be summarized as follows:
(1)
The design method proposed in this paper, exhibits superior internal force performance and displacement control capabilities, when compared with traditional design approaches that cable prestress optimization. Under dynamic load, the stiffness design method introduced in this study demonstrates enhanced adaptability.
(2)
Different displacement envelope function designs yield varying effects; under static loads, power function with power equal to 2 are optimal, while under dynamic loads, power function with power equal to 1 are preferable. For more complex loads, employing non-fully curves enhance the controllability of the structural response.
(3)
The influence of different boundary conditions on SFT is confined to the revetment tubes, significantly impacting the bending moments in this section and even affecting the direction of vertical deflection. However, the impact on displacement and bending moments in the midspan segment is minimal. Under dynamic load, the influence on structural response is greater than that under static load.
Despite these significant strides in the analysis and design of SFT, some restrictions and future work still should be noted in this study:
(1)
Under dynamic loading, the loads exerted on the joint are complex, and there is a discrepancy between the theoretical analysis and actual performance presented in this paper. Future research could consider load variability, investigating the forces and calculation methods at joint positions under a variety of complex loading conditions.
(2)
The stiffness design method in this paper is based on the segmentation and displacement methods, which limits the complexity of the loads that can be studied. It only allows for the investigation of direct loads applied to the SFT, precluding the examination of designs under indirect loads such as those from earthquakes. Future research could explore the transformation between indirect and direct loads or seek better foundational methodologies to guide the design of SFT under such conditions.
(3)
Although this study conducts a large number of validated numerical simulations and theoretical analyses from the perspective of stiffness design, the implementation of multi-section experiments is still needed to verify the existing research on SFT. Future research could explore the multi-section experiments to verify the accuracy of numerical and theoretical research.