1. Introduction
In thermal protection systems (TPS) for reusable launch vehicles, there are three types of TPS, active TPS, passive TPS, and semi-passive TPS [[1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8]]. Among these, passive TPS are distinguished by their straightforward design, ease of use, and high reliability, which has led to their widespread adoption [[9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15]]. In the field of passive TPS, MTPS stands out because of their simplicity, great impact resistance, and ease of fabrication, so it is the first choice for large-area thermal protection in reusable launch vehicles [[16], [17], [18]]. However, MTPS faces challenges such as thermal short-circuiting and thermal mismatch, primarily caused by the connecting brackets used to attach the honeycomb and panel to the base plate [[19], [20], [21], [22], [23]]. Addressing these challenges, parameter study is necessary on MTPS, which considers connecting brackets [24,25]. Additionally, achieving high mass efficiency, excellent thermal insulation and thermo-mechanical properties in MTPS is crucial [[26], [27], [28], [29], [30], [31]]. The selection of appropriate design parameters plays a significant role in meeting these requirements, as these parameters directly influence the thermal and mechanical behavior of the MTPS [32,33].
The effect of design parameters on the thermal insulation and thermo-mechanical properties of TPS has been an important topic of previous research. Chen et al. [34] demonstrated that bilayer lattice TPS can significantly reduce the overheating caused by the thermal short-circuiting effect compared with the single-layer TPS. Blosser et al. [35] determined the panel thickness, core thickness, felt thickness of a MTPS dimensions through an iterative approach. Bracket buckling load needs to be > 0.2 MPa and expansion slot clearance needs to be > 5 mm to address thermal mismatch. However, the effect of these dimensional parameters has not been studied in depth. Vinh et al. [36] studied that effect of the core thickness and panel thickness on the MTPS thermo-mechanical properties. Their findings indicated that a minimum core thickness of 0.2 mm is required to satisfy stiffness requirements. In 2021, Xu et al. [37] revealed that the maximum cool face temperature of the optimized TPS decreased from 416 K to 351 K, and the buckling load was significantly enhanced. However, the maximum out-of-plane displacement increased due to the optimization of size and shape parameters. In 2023, Hui et al. [38] found that thermal insulation properties increased with increased thickness. However, compressive strength significantly decreased, falling from 119.41 MPa to 35.16 MPa. Dorsey et al. [39] summarized the critical points of geometry and assembly parameters of the MTPS. They determined that the thickness of each TPS element should be at least 0.15 mm. Kiran et al. [40] estimated the effect of various design parameters on the bending stiffness of the honeycomb sandwich panels used in the MTPS. Guo [41] found that increasing panel thickness reduces top panel deformation and stresses around the lugs but results in increased mass, higher core stresses, and elevated internal honeycomb core temperatures. However, it does not consider the effect of connecting brackets.
Vinh et al. [42] found that a mismatch in thermal expansion occurs in MTPS when connection brackets are attached directly to the ends without expansion slots, adversely affecting structural strength. Thinner connection brackets can mitigate the thermal short-circuiting effect and enhance thermal insulation properties. Belardo et al. [43] found that thermal insulation properties can be improved by modifying the connecting bracket shape, such as adopting a V-shaped design and adding perforations. These findings highlight that the cross-sectional design of connecting brackets plays a critical role in mitigating thermal short-circuiting.
Blosser et al. [44] found that the higher heat capacity and lower thermal conductivity of the structure material significantly enhance thermal insulation properties of MTPS. Additionally, insulation felt with lower thermal conductivity improves mass efficiency. Poteet et al. [45] observed that air convection and lower environmental temperatures at the base plate contribute to better thermal insulation performance, enabling reductions in the thickness and weight of the MTPS. Gou et al. [46] analyzed material and geometric parameters for an integrated TPS with a corrugated core sandwich structure. However, their study overlooked the effects of these parameters on thermo-mechanical properties.
Most previous investigations on MTPS have focused on mass efficiency and thermal insulation properties, and discussed only one or several design parameters such as the thermal conductivity of insulation felt, panel thickness, insulation felt thickness, and honeycomb thickness, which related to material properties and structural geometry. However, critical parameters, including MTPS size, the thermal conductivity and thermal expansion coefficient of connecting brackets, expansion slot major length, and bolt-slot fit, have received little attention. There is also a lack of comprehensive and systematic (including multiple parameters, multiple properties, and effect mechanisms) parameter study, which requires extensive experimentation and a thorough understanding of MTPS failure modes.
Furthermore, few investigations have provided thermal insulation and thermo-mechanical properties of a detailed MTPS considering connection brackets and expansion slots, which fail to adequately address critical issues such as thermal short-circuiting and thermal mismatch in MTPS. Therefore, conducting a systematic parameter study of MTPS considering connection brackets and expansion slots is necessary. At the same time, the systematic parameter study of MTPS is feasible with the insights gained from our previous study [47] on potential failure modes and several critical property evaluation indexes and the low computational cost achieved through the uniform design method.
Building on previous research [47] into the thermal insulation and thermo-mechanical properties of MTPS which was designed for large-area thermal protection on the lower surface of reusable reentry vehicles, a further investigation on effects of the critical design parameters on mass efficiency, thermal insulation properties, and thermo-mechanical properties was conducted. Based on the validated FEM considering connecting brackets and expansion slots, the effects of the design parameters on the mass efficiency, thermal insulation properties, and thermo-mechanical properties (including strength, stiffness, bucking resistance) of the MTPS were studied and compared systematically through the uniform design and multiple linear regression analysis methods. Additionally, single-factor analyses were performed for parameters with significant effects, providing detailed insights into parameters effect mechanisms.
2. Materials and FEM
A MTPS was proposed and tested in our previous study [47]. The configuration and dimensions of the MTPS are shown in Fig. 1. The MTPS consists of a honeycomb, panels, insulation aerogel felt, connecting brackets, and a base plate. The connecting brackets attach the honeycomb with panel to the base plate with two sets of bolts, and the hollow of the brackets is filled with insulation material to mitigate the thermal short-circuiting effect. Additionally, the MTPS measures 200 mm × 200 mm with a total thickness of 29 mm. The honeycomb structure is 5.4 mm thick, featuring a wall thickness of 0.3 mm and a cell size of 10.8 mm. The panels are 0.3 mm thick, while the insulation aerogel felt has a thickness of 20 mm. The base plate is 3 mm thick and is welded to two ribs, each 20 mm long, 3 mm wide, and spaced 120 mm apart, representing the vehicle's cold structure. The connecting brackets are modeled as hollow cylinders with a wall thickness of 1 mm and a diameter of 18 mm. At the upper end of each connecting bracket, an expansion slot measuring 9.5 mm in length and 6.5 mm in width is included.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (496KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Configuration and dimensions of the MTPS.

The equivalent and validated FEM of the MTPS was established in our previous study [47]. Fig. 2 shows details of the FEM. The elements, material properties, contact relationships between elements, loads, boundary conditions, mesh types and analysis procedure are consistent with those in our previous study [47]. The analysis procedure consists of two main parts: heat transfer analysis and sequential thermo-mechanical coupling analysis. The cold surface of the MTPS was assigned a convective heat transfer coefficient of 3 W/(m2·K), following Ref. [47]. The material properties of the MTPS are listed in Table 1. The panels, bolts, and connecting brackets are made of high-temperature nickel alloy GH4169, while the base plate and ribs use TC4 titanium alloy. The insulation aerogel felt incorporates SiO2 aerogel, and the honeycomb is modeled as an equivalent GH4169 honeycomb structure. To simplify the model, it is assumed that the material parameters vary linearly between interpolation points [[48], [49], [50], [51]], based on the fact that the materials operate far below the high-temperature softening stage and exhibit approximately linear property changes within the relevant temperature range. A constant modulus is adopted, as its slight temperature-dependent variation has a negligible effect on the thermo-mechanical response due to the thin panel and weak frictional connection. These assumptions, while reasonable for the present analysis, represent a limitation that will be addressed in future work through the incorporation of nonlinear temperature-dependent material models. Furthermore, the constitutive model employed in the FEM was based on linear elasticity, neglecting plastic behavior, as this study primarily focuses on assessing structural failure (determined by the yield strength) rather than post-yield deformation.
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (415KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. The FEM of MTPS

Table 1. Material properties of various elements in the MTPS [47].

Material	Density (g/cm3)	Thermal conductivity (W/(m·K))	Specific heat (J/(kg·K))	Elastic modulus (GPa)	Poisson's ratio	Thermal expansion coefficient ( × 10−6)	Yield strength (MPa)
GH4169	8.24	13.4–23.6 (20–800 °C)	481∼615 (20–800 °C)	204	0.3	11.8–17 (20–800 °C)	965∼590∼450 (20–650∼800 °C)
TC4	4.5	6.8–7.4 (20–100 °C)	611∼704 (20–500 °C)	110	0.34	9.6–10 (60–300 °C)	825∼731∼504.9 (20–200∼400 °C)
SiO2 aerogel felt	0.2	0.024–0.04 (25–600 °C)	800	0.003	0.2	0.12	2
GH4169 honeycomb equivalent model	0.732	0.65	548	17	0.3	11.8–17 (20–800 °C)	28
The heat transfer mechanism of the proposed MTPS is shown in Fig. 3. Since the heat flux is applied through a temperature boundary condition in this work and the temperature remains below 800 °C, the effect of thermal surface radiation is not considered in the FEM.
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (205KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Heat transfer mechanism of the MTPS.

The thermal conduction and thermal convection exchange equations are as follows:
(1)
(2)
Where Q represents the heat flux, K is the thermal conductivity of the materials, A is the heat transfer area, and 
 represents the temperature gradient. The term h is the thermal convection exchange coefficient of the surface, and ΔT refers to the temperature difference.
The obtained temperature field is imported into the FEM of the MTPS to perform a sequential thermo-mechanical coupling analysis. The governing equation for this analysis can be expressed as:
(3)
(4)
where 
 represents the divergence of the stress tensor 
, indicating the internal stress distribution within the material; 
 is the body force vector per unit volume; 
 denotes the material density; 
 is the acceleration vector, defined as the second derivative of the displacement 
 with respect to time.
In equation (4), 
 is the elastic stiffness matrix, 
 is the total strain tensor, 
 is the coefficient of thermal expansion, 
 is the current temperature, 
 is the initial temperature, and 
 is the second-order identity tensor.
3. Methods of parameters discussions
3.1. Parameters
The MTPS features numerous design parameters, but only some of them including geometry parameters, assembly relationship parameters, and material properties have effects on MTPS properties [34,36,38,[42], [43], [44]]. However, the mechanisms and significances of effects of these parameters on the overall properties of MTPS remain unclear. This study focuses on the common geometry parameters (including the MTPS size, thickness of the panel, honeycomb, insulation felt), connecting bracket parameters (including the thickness, hollow ratio, thermal expansion coefficient (CET), and thermal conductivity), and assembly relationships parameters (including major length and bolt-slot fit of the expansion slot). These parameters are closely related to the thermal short-circuiting and thermal mismatch problems, which may have significant effects on the properties of the MTPS. Moreover, these parameters are seldom mentioned in previous studies, and it is worthwhile to conduct in-depth studies to understand the effect mechanisms, providing valuable insights for design of the MTPS.
Table 2 shows the value ranges for the ten selected design parameters related to geometry, assembly relationships, and material properties. For each parameter, evenly spaced values are chosen, ranging from the minimum value (Vmin) to maximum value (Vmax).
Table 2. Design parameters and their range of values.

Design parameter	Vmin	Vmax
geometry		
Connecting brackets thickness Tb (mm)	0.2	1
Connecting brackets hollow ratio Hr (%)	0	80
Insulation felt thickness Tf (mm)	10	30
Honeycomb thickness Th (mm)	2	8
Panel thickness Tp (mm)	0.1	0.5
MTPS size St	100	300
Assembly relationships		
Expansion slot major length Ls (mm)	6	10
Bolt-slot fit d (mm)	−1	0
Material properties		
Bracket thermal conductivity Cb (W/m·K)	0.5	15
CET of bracket CETb ( × 10−6)	2	15
To minimize weight without compromising the MTPS properties, the geometry of all elements, except for the MTPS size, should be kept as small as possible [41]. The panel thickness is constrained by fabrication limitations and stiffness requirements, with a minimum value of 0.1 mm [22]. Additionally, to assure the thermal insulation properties, the thickness of the insulation felt should not be too small, 10 mm is selected as the minimum value [45]. The connecting bracket thickness has a minimum value of 0.2 mm, while the maximum hollow ratio of the connecting brackets is set at 80 % to maintain load-bearing capacity [37,39]. For the MTPS size, a range of 100 mm × 100 mm–300 mm × 300 mm is chosen, with the lower limit based on practicality and the upper limit guided by previous recommendations [45,52]. The minimum expansion slot major length is 6 mm, matching the bolt diameter, while the maximum length is set at 10 mm, which is slightly greater than the value recommended by Ref. [53]. Material properties such as thermal conductivity and the CET are selected to reflect those of high-temperature structural materials commonly used in engineering, including ceramics, steel, titanium alloys, and nickel alloys. Other parameters are consistent with the original FEM in Section 2.
3.2. Design indexes
MTPS are known to have specific property requirements, including thermal insulation, strength, stiffness, and mass efficiency [1,22,39,54]. Studying these properties comprehensively is essential, ensuring the safety and reliability of the MTPS. Additionally, the parameters under discussion have the potential to significantly influence these property indexes, making a parameter study both necessary and feasible.
In our previous study [47], the thermal insulation and thermo-mechanical properties of the MTPS were investigated, and six potential failure modes along with their corresponding failure criteria were identified. The physical quantities associated with these failure criteria can reflect the properties of the MTPS.
Overall, six physical quantities were selected as design indexes. Table 3 lists the design indexes, their symbols, and specifications. Among them, L1, L2 represent the thermal insulation properties, S corresponds to strength, B and UP reflect stiffness, and Mp indicates the mass efficiency of the MTPS.
Table 3. Design indexes and their symbols.

Design indexes	symbols	specification
Maximum temperature of cold face (°C)	L1	The maximum temperature at L1 is used to evaluate the thermal short-circuit effect of the connection bracket
Maximum temperature of cold face near to bracket (°C)	L2	The maximum temperature at L2 is used to assess the thermal insulation of the overall structure
Bracket Strength(MPa)	S	The maximum stress of the brackets is used to evaluate the strength of the MTPS
Maximum out-of-plane deformation per panel diagonal length (%)	UP	Maximum out-of-plane deformation per panel diagonal length is used to evaluate stiffness of the MTPS
Buckling load (MPa)	B	Buckling load of the panel is used to evaluate stability of the MTPS
Structural mass per unit area (Kg/m2)	Mp	Structural mass per unit area is used to evaluate mass efficiency of the MTPS
3.3. Uniform design method and effect evaluation method
The Uniform design method is a statistical design approach used to optimize experimental layouts by evenly distributing sample points across the experimental space [55]. This method is useful when studying the effects of multiple parameters on system property, as it ensures that the experimental combinations are well-distributed and representative without requiring extensive sampling. Unlike traditional factorial designs, the uniform design method uses a smaller number of experimental runs while maintaining comprehensive coverage of the design space, making it highly efficient for complex, high-dimensional problems.
Analyzing the effects of all discussed design parameters on MTPS properties through a large number of FEM with varying parameter combinations is impractical due to the associated computational costs. Uniform design method can be used to reduce the number of parameter combinations and provide reliable results. In this work, a uniform design table U15(510) [56] with ten factors, five levels and fifteen combinations is used to discuss the effect of different parameter combinations, as shown in Table 4. There are 15 combination cases that will be analyzed in the following contents. The number of the groups is three times the number of levels to assure that valid results are obtained.
Table 4. Uniform design table U15(510) for parameters study of the MTPS.

combination	factor	Empty Cell	Empty Cell	Empty Cell	Empty Cell	Empty Cell	Empty Cell	Empty Cell	Empty Cell	Empty Cell
Tb (mm)	Hr (%)	Tf (mm)	Th (mm)	Tp (mm)	St (mm)	Ls (mm)	D (mm)	Cb (W/m·K)	CETb ( × 10−6)
1	0.6	0	15	2	0.2	100	8	0	15	8.5
2	0.4	60	30	5	0.3	250	10	0	11.4	2
3	0.2	0	25	3.5	0.5	200	7	−0.25	4.1	5.25
4	1	20	25	5	0.4	100	10	−0.5	0.5	11.75
5	0.6	60	30	2	0.4	150	6	−1	7.75	11.75
6	1	40	10	3.5	0.4	250	7	−0.75	11.4	2
7	0.4	20	20	8	0.1	150	6	−0.5	11.4	2
8	0.4	20	20	6.5	0.5	300	9	−0.75	15	11.75
9	1	80	25	6.5	0.2	200	7	−0.25	15	15
10	0.8	60	10	8	0.5	150	9	−0.25	7.75	8.5
11	0.2	80	15	6.5	0.3	100	8	−0.75	0.5	5.25
12	0.6	40	10	5	0.3	300	6	0	0.5	15
13	0.8	0	30	8	0.2	250	8	−1	4.1	8.5
14	0.2	40	15	3.5	0.1	200	10	−1	7.75	5.25
15	0.8	80	20	2	0.1	300	9	−0.5	4.1	15
The uniform design method ensures a uniform distribution of test points across the parameter space but lacks strict comparability among the test points. To address this limitation, the FEM results obtained from the uniform design method can be analyzed using the multiple linear regression method. The multiple linear regression not only establishes the relationship between the design indexes and multiple design parameters, but also employs standard regression coefficients (SRC) to evaluate the significance and correlations of each design parameter on the design indexes.
In this work, the numbers of design indexes, design parameters and combination cases of design parameters are 6, 10 and 15, respectively. So, the multiple linear regression equation between a specific MTPS design index 
 and design parameters can be represented as:
(5)
Where 
 is design index vector of item m. 
 is the matrix of design parameters, in which 
 with 15 item, and 
 (j = 1, 2, …, 10). 
 is vector of regression coefficients, and 
 is the intercept. 
 is vector of unobservable random variables and obeys normal distribution 
. Furthermore, the bold font indicates that the variable is in tensor form.
In a single analysis with a specific combination, design index 
 is:
(6)
where 
 are design parameter values of the combination.
For design index 
 and design parameter Xj., the corresponding SRC is:
(7)
where 
 and 
 are standard deviations of design parameter 
 and design index 
, respectively.
If 
 > 0, 
 shows positive effect on 
, while 
 < 0, Xj shows negative effect on 
. Additionally, The larger the value of 
 the stronger, the effect of the design parameters on the significance of the design metrics. Therefore, 
 can be used to compare the significance of effects among different design parameters.
4. Results
Table 5 shows the calculated results of the corresponding FEM for the 15 combinations. Based on these results, a multiple linear regression analysis can be performed to investigate the effect of the design parameters on MTPS properties.
Table 5. FEM simulation results for each combination.

combination	design index	Empty Cell	Empty Cell	Empty Cell	Empty Cell
L1 (°C)	L2 (°C)	S (MPa)	UP (%)	B (MPa)	Mp (Kg/m2)
1	355	380	550	0.28	3.05	11.40
2	42	103	930	0.68	0.085	15.06
3	71	83	950	0.73	1.05	16.53
4	50	58	274	0.54	19.02	20.60
5	52	79	282	0.36	0.57	15.56
6	191	390	880	0.68	2.72	11.62
7	108	159	785	0.61	0.26	12.98
8	80	243	811	1.83	0.15	17.22
9	60	93	963	0.60	0.058	13.78
10	187	234	728	0.89	0.077	17.24
11	108	92	401	0.47	0.086	15.00
12	177	224	965	1.81	0.36	10.90
13	42	122	450	1.08	4.20	16.16
14	120	160	850	0.16	0.28	7.85
15	82	120	730	0.39	0.26	7.40
The R2 coefficients of the dependent variables L1, L2, S, Up, B and Mp in the regression model are 0.89, 0.91, 0.83, 0.92, 0.83, and 0.98. These values, being close to 1, indicate the validity of the multiple linear regression model. Therefore, the SRC can effectively characterize the effect of design parameters on the mass efficiency, thermal insulation, and thermo-mechanical properties of the MTPS.
Fig. 4 shows the variation of SRC with each design parameter for different design indexes. To more directly observe the effect of each design parameter on different design indexes, the plus ‘+’ indicates positive effect while the minus ‘-’ indicates negative effect, as shown in Table 6. Three plus signs represent SRC ≥0.5, two plus signs represent 0.3 ≤ SRC <0.5, one plus signs represents 0.1 ≤ SRC <0.3, if 0≤ SRC <0.1, no plus signs is used. For negative SRC values, the corresponding number of ‘–’ signs are applied.
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Effect of design parameters on design indexes of the MTPS.

Table 6. Summary of effect rules of the design parameters on design indexes of the MTPS.

Design index	Tb	Hr	Tf	Th	Tp	St	Ls	d	Cb	CETb
L1		- -	- - -	-	-	-		+	+	+
L2	+	- -	- - -	-		+			++	-
S	-		- -			++	- -	++	-	+
Up	-	-	-	++	++	+++	-			++
B	+++	- -	+			- -	++			
M	+	-	++	++	+++	- -	+			
Among the design indexes, L1, L2 represent the thermal insulation properties, S corresponds to strength, B and UP reflect stiffness, and Mp indicates the mass efficiency of the MTPS. The decrease in the design metrics L1, L2, S, Up, and M indicates an improvement in the corresponding properties of the MTPS, whereas the decrease in B signifies a decline in bucking resistance properties. So, for design indexes L1 and L2, the negative signs in the columns Hr, Tf,Th and Tp indicate that increasing these four design parameters enhances the thermal insulation properties of the MTPS. Conversely, the positive signs in the columns Cb and Tb suggest that reducing the thermal conductivity and thickness of the connecting brackets improves thermal insulation. Variation in St, Ls, d, and CETb have less effect on the thermal insulation properties. For the design indexes S and Up, increasing Th, Tp, St, d and CETb can reduce the strength and stiffness of the MTPS, while increasing Tb, Hr, Tf, Ls, and Cb would improve the MTPS strength and stiffness. Additionally, increasing Tb, Tf, and Ls have positive effects on buckling resistance, while increase of Hr and St has negative effects on buckling resistance. Other design parameters show less effect on the buckling resistance. For better mass efficiency, reducing Tb, Tf, Th, Tp and Ls or increasing Hr and St is beneficial.
5. Discussions
The results of the parameter significance analysis show that each design parameter has a significant effect on a particular MTPS property. To explore the effect mechanisms, a single-factor analysis of the design parameters that have a significant effect on properties of the MTPS was conducted, which provides a systematic and comprehensive understanding of how each parameter influences MTPS properties. In addition, the robustness of the multiple linear regression model used in the parameter study was evaluated.
5.1. Geometry parameters
The temperature and stress curves with different insulation felt thickness are shown in Fig. 5. In the figure, ‘Tf = 10-L1’ denotes the temperature at L1 when insulation felt thickness (Tf) is 10 mm. According to Fig. 5(a), both L1 and L2 decrease with the Tf increase. The insulation felt, with low thermal conductivity, plays a crucial role in the thermal insulation properties of MTPS, which aligns with the research in Ref. [44]. The interaction of the insulation felt with the connecting brackets mitigates the thermal short-circuiting effect. From the thermal equation, it can be seen that when Tf increases, the thermal path becomes longer, and the amount of the (Q) decreases, while at the same time, the thermal capacity increases, which leads to later warming of L1 and L2, and ultimately leads to a decrease in the overall temperature of heat transfer the MTPS. Additionally, the difference between the L1 and L2 is caused by the thermal short-circuiting effect occurring at the connecting brackets, which have high thermal conductivity. This difference remains nearly constant as Tf increases. This indicates that increasing Tf can reduce the overall temperature of the MTPS, but it cannot the eliminate thermal short-circuiting effect. Thus, addressing thermal short-circuiting issue solely by increasing Tf would compromise mass efficiency.
Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (638KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Temperature and stress variation curves with different Tf.

According to Fig. 5(b), the stress in the connecting brackets decreases as the insulation felt thickness (Tf) increases. To eliminate the influence of the assembly relationship on the results, all models were set such that the honeycomb with panel being in contact with the connecting brackets with a coefficient of friction of 0.2, so the honeycomb with panel can expand freely. Over time, the honeycomb thermal expansion displacement increases and squeezes the connecting brackets, resulting in increased contact stress and increased bracket stress. However, a turning point occurs due to the transition of the contact condition between the honeycomb with panel and connecting brackets from static friction to kinetic friction. As a result, the rate of stress increase decreases and the maximum stress decreases, ensuring the strength of the connecting brackets. Furthermore, with an increase in Tf, the thermal short-circuiting effect is mitigated, the temperature gradient becomes smaller, and the honeycomb squeeze on the connecting bracket becomes weaker, leading to a reduction in bracket stress. This finding suggests an alternative method for mitigating the thermal mismatch effect, which is different from the strain isolation pad and expansion slots designs described in Ref. [42].
Fig. 6 shows the displacement-time curves, the temperature, and contact stress distribution of the MTPS with different honeycomb thickness (Th) and panel thickness (Tp). As can be seen in Fig. 6(a), increasing Th and Tp results in the increase in out-of-panel displacement U3, which is the opposite of the findings reported in Ref. [41]. According to Fig. 6(b), the temperature gradient increases with the increasing Th, causing the honeycomb and panel to exhibit a larger deflection angle. This increased deflection angle applies greater downward pressure on the connecting bracket, causing the to form an arch shape and increasing U3. Similarly, an increase in Tp results in higher contact stress, indicating greater squeezing of the connecting bracket, which leads to a larger deflection angle and a further increase in U3. Given that Th and Tp have less effect on the thermal insulation and strength of the MTPS, their reduction not only enhances stiffness but also improves mass efficiency. Therefore, thinner panels and honeycombs should be employed within appropriate design ranges.
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (594KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Displacement variation curves with different Th and Tp.

Increasing the hollow ratio (Hr) of connecting brackets and decreasing the connecting brackets thickness (Tb) can reduce L2, which is caused by thermal short-circuiting effect, thereby enhancing the thermal insulation properties of the MTPS, as shown in Fig. 7. These findings support the results reported in reference [34]. The mitigation of thermal short-circuiting is primarily due to the reduction in heat transfer (Q) caused by the decreased cross-sectional area of the connecting brackets. The result is significant because it highlights a new approach to solving the thermal short-circuiting effect by optimized connecting brackets configuration design, contrasting with previous studies that primarily focused on improving thermal insulation properties of material. However, increasing Hr and decreasing Tb decreased the buckling resistance of the MTPS. This reduction in buckling resistance is attributable to the diminished cross-sectional area, which weakens the structural stability of the connecting brackets. Similar to the findings of reference [34], our results confirm the importance of having sufficient thickness of connecting brackets. This suggests that the thin-sheet brackets proposed in previous studies may be unsuitable due to their low buckling resistance. Overall, the conflicting effects on thermal insulation and buckling resistance of the MTPS necessitate a coordinated selection process for Hr and Tb to achieve an optimal balance.
Fig. 7
Download: Download high-res image (621KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Temperature variation curves with different Tb and Hr.

In previous research [45,47], the sizing of MTPS has often been determined empirically. This study reveals that increasing the MTPS size (St) leads to higher maximum connecting bracket stress (S) and greater maximum out-of-plane deformation per panel diagonal length (Up), as shown in Fig. 8. This is caused by the increased thermal expansion displacement associated with larger sizes. These findings suggest that the MTPS size should be minimized while ensuring an acceptable level of mass efficiency. Moreover, it provides a method for sizing the MTPS by evaluation of thermo-mechanical properties through a numerical simulation method, which can reduce the significant experimental costs. However, it should be mentioned that this sizing method focuses solely on the thermo-mechanical properties of the MTPS itself and does not account for interactions between different MTPS units.
Fig. 8
Download: Download high-res image (295KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Stress and displacement variation curves with different St.

5.2. Assembly relationships
Since the thermal gradient in the thickness direction of the MTPS, the outer surface experiences greater thermal expansion deformation caused by higher temperatures. If the honeycomb with panel is rigidly connected to the brackets without expansion slots to allow free deformation, this can lead to connecting bracket failure. This issue is a key contributor to thermal mismatch in the MTPS. Using expansion slots and bolt-slot fit helps to mitigate the thermal mismatch effect by releasing the degrees of freedom of honeycomb with panel. Compared to previous studies such as [48], our approach locates expansion slots near honeycomb with panel instead of near the base plate, avoiding interrupting the load transfer to the base plate.
A larger expansion slot major length (Ls) and smaller bolt-slot fit (d) decrease the connecting bracket strength(S) at the point B, thereby improving the strength properties of the MTPS, as can be seen in Fig. 9. In the figure, there are two stages: the free expansion with friction (FEF) stage and the bolt squeezes expansion slot (BSES) stage. These stages are divided by the point in time when the bolt begins to squeeze the connecting bracket in the 45° direction. Point A denotes the squeezed point during the FEF stage, while point B denotes the squeezed point during the BSES stage. Additionally, ‘Ls = 10-S-A’ denotes indicates the stress at point A of the connecting bracket with 10 mm L, and ‘d = −0.5-S-B’ denotes the stress at point B with −0.5 mm d, the negative number indicates a clearance fit. According to Fig. 9, the change in the assembly relationship has less effect on the stress at point A, but a significant effect on the stress at point B, making point B the critical location for analysis. As can be seen in Fig. 9(a), during the thermal load process, the MTPS enter FEF stage with no increase in stress, and the bolt contacts and squeezes the connecting bracket when the honeycomb with panel expands to a specific value (e.g., at points C and D), causing a rapid increase stress. With the Ls increases, the turning point shifts to a later time and the degree of squeezing between the connecting bracket and bolt decreases, leading to a reduction in connecting bracket stress. When Ls reaches 8 mm (with a −0.25 mm d), the connecting bracket just meets the strength requirements. Additionally, while Ls increases to 10 mm, the bolt would not contact the connecting bracket, resulting in consistently low stress levels. According to Fig. 9(b), the mechanism by which d affects the connecting bracket stress at point B is similar to that of the Ls. However, the difference lies in the advancement of the BSES stage and the shift of the squeezed point B away from the 45° direction, which increases the connecting bracket stress as the d increase to 0. Therefore, a sufficiently small d is necessary to minimize the connecting bracket stress and ensure the strength of the MTPS. Overall, the significant insight is that the sizes of Ls and d can be determined based on the bracket strength (S). For a 200 mm MTPS, an 8 mm L and a −0.25 mm d are recommended, offering more precise values compared to previous work, which suggested an 11 mm L in Ref. [44]. It should be noted that the bracket model only assesses whether the yield stress is reached, without accounting for plastic deformation, as the primary focus is on permissible stress during preliminary design and stress analysis of the MTPS.
Fig. 9
Download: Download high-res image (622KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Stress-time curves with different Ls and d.

5.3. Material properties
Decreasing the connecting bracket conductivity (Cb) reduces the L2, thereby improving thermal insulation properties of the MTPS, as shown in Fig. 10. According to the heat transfer equation, the heat transfer (Q) decreases with the thermal conductivity (K) decreases. This indicates that lowering Cb plays a critical role in mitigating the thermal short-circuiting effect of the connecting bracket. Therefore, an effective method to improve the thermal insulation properties of the MTPS is to use low-Cb materials for the connecting brackets, such as quartz brackets or foam brackets.
Fig. 10
Download: Download high-res image (265KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 10. Temperature-time curves with different Cb.

Fig. 11 presents that the decreasing the thermal expansion coefficient of connecting bracket (CETb) of the connecting bracket results in an increase in the connecting bracket stress (S) only when considering the interact between the connecting bracket and the bolt. Changes in CETb have less effect on the S and the displacement (U3) When the bolt role is not considered, which indicates the absence of the BSES stage. This discrepancy could be attributed to the thermal stress occurring at the restrained end and a thermal mismatch caused by the different CET between the bolt and the connecting bracket during the BSES stage. While this finding contradicts the results of the multiple linear regression analysis, the inconsistency may be related to the limited number of sample combinations and the interaction of multiple factors considered in the regression analysis. These findings suggest that increasing the Ls or reducing d could prevent entry into the BSES stage, thereby avoiding a sharp increase in S when using the low-CETb connecting brackets. A limitation of this study is that the material properties used may not represent actual materials but were selected to explore the effects of these properties on the results. In addition, the proposed MTPS is applicable only for service temperatures not exceeding 800 °C. Future research could focus on finding a low-Cb material with a CET similar to that of the panel to address both thermal short-circuiting and thermal mismatch issues. Simultaneously, enhancing bolt strength is essential to prevent bolt failures caused by thermal mismatch.
Fig. 11
Download: Download high-res image (597KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 11. Stress and displacement variation curves with different CETb and d.

5.4. Robustness analysis
To assess the robustness of the regression-based sensitivity analysis, a Leave-One-Out (LOO) procedure was performed for each design index. The LOO method evaluates the effect of individual samples by repeatedly refitting the regression model after removing one data point at a time [57]. In each iteration, one of the fifteen design combinations was excluded and the model was recalibrated using the remaining samples. The SRC obtained from the fifteen refits are presented in Fig. 12, where the dashed lines denote the SRC from the original full-sample regression model.
Fig. 12
Download: Download high-res image (2MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 12. Variation of SRC under the LOO analysis for the six design indexes.

Across all design indexes, the SRC of most design parameters exhibit only minor fluctuations during the LOO iterations. The variations are significantly smaller than the predefined classification thresholds (0.1, 0.3, 0.5), and all parameters retain the same sensitivity levels as those obtained from the full-sample regression model. This demonstrates that the SRC-based sensitivity classification is statistically robust and not influenced by individual sample. In addition, the parameters identified as having significant effects consistently remain in the high sensitivity level throughout the LOO iterations, confirming the reliability of the sensitivity analysis of this work.
6. Conclusion
Based on the validated model, the effects of the design parameters on the mass efficiency, thermal insulation, and thermo-mechanical properties of the MTPS, were investigated systematically by the uniform design and multiple linear regression analysis methods. The following conclusions can be obtained.
(1)
Parameters Tf and Hr have significant effects on thermal insulation properties of the MTPS, both exhibiting positive effects. Parameters Ls, d, and CETb show significance for the strength. For stiffness and mass efficiency, Tp and Th play the most critical roles, demonstrating negative effects. The parameters with the greatest impact on buckling properties are Tb and Hr.
(2)
Adopting a greater Ls and Tb, while employing a smaller d and Hr, is recommended to satisfy the load-carrying capacity requirements of the MTPS. A greater Ls and smaller d can eliminate the thermal mismatch effect occurring between the connecting bracket and the honeycomb with panel. A greater Tb and smaller d can enhance buckling resistance.
(3)
Increasing the Tf and Hr is preferred to improve thermal insulation properties of the MTPS. A greater Tf can reduce the overall temperature, and a greater Hr can mitigate the thermal short-circuiting effect occurring at the connecting bracket.
(4)
Reducing Tp, Th, and Tf effectively enhances the MTPS mass efficiency.
(5)
The selection of suitable Tb and Hr is critical for balancing load-carrying capacity with thermal insulation properties. Similarly, an appropriate St should be chosen to achieve a balance between load-carrying capacity and mass efficiency. Careful selection of Tf is necessary to balance load-carrying capacity with thermal insulation properties.
(6)
The differences in the CET between the connecting bracket and the bolt contribute to thermal mismatch effect, and a high Cb can lead to thermal short-circuiting effect.