This voluntary LER is submitted for information purposes only as described in
Item 19 of Supplement Number 1 to NUREG-1022.
On June 27, 1990, setpoints for several installed 480V system protective devices
(thermal overload relay heater elements and molded case circuit breakers) were
determined to differ from setpoints recalculated in support of the Diablo Canyon Power
Plant (DCPP) Configuration Management Enhancement Program. Investigation determined
that manufacturers' tolerances in combination with worst-case design voltages
(maximum/minimum) had not been taken into account when device setpoints had been
originally determined. The original setpoint determination was performed by use of
manufacturer-supplied instructions and tables.
The scenario of sustained maximum/minimum voltages is not considered credible at DCPP,
and therefore none of the Class 1E thermal overload relays would have inadvertently
tripped a safety function. Also, the affected safety-related circuit breakers would not
have inadvertently tripped under minimum voltage conditions nor experienced high voltage
conditions, thus assuring their safe operation.
The root cause was determined to be lack of sufficient procedural guidance to ensure
that setpoints would envelope all design requirements. Corrective actions included
revision of device setpoints and procedures.

Initial Conditions
Units 1 and 2 have been in various modes and at various power levels with
the conditions described below.
II. Description of Event
A. Event:
PG&E is implementing a Configuration Management Enhancement Program
(CMEP) at Diablo Canyon Power Plant (DCPP), which includes a program
to formalize and document design bases and design requirements for
protective device setpoints. On July 27, 1990, during the CMEP review
for the 480V System (ED), a Nuclear Engineering and Construction
Services (NECS) engineer determined that several protective device
setpoints recalculated in support of the CMEP differed from the
existing installed device setpoints. Specifically, several as-found
thermal overload relay (49)(ED) heater element setpoints and 480V
molded case magnetic trip circuit breaker (52)(ED) instantaneous trip
setpoints were different than the recalculated values.
Thermal Overload Relays
The thermal overload relays function to protect engineered safety
feature (ESF) 460V motors (MO)(ED) from sustained high current
conditions. The current passing through an overload relay also passes
through the heater element. The heater element converts the current
to an equivalent heat load and actuates the relay when a specified
setpoint is reached. As discussed in FSAR Update Appendix 8.3.A,
ESF motors are designed to "operate continuously, without harm,
with voltages within plus or minus 10 percent of their rating."
When operating at 90 percent of rated voltage, the motors will draw a
higher current. With the as-found thermal overload setpoints and with
postulated low voltage conditions of long enough duration, the
possibility exists that a thermal overload relay could trip even
though the load on its motor was still well within the motor operating
limits.
The thermal overload relay sizing recalculations performed during the
CMEP review specifically accounted for both relay manufacturers'
tolerances and the load current at minimum design voltage. However,
the installed thermal overloads were sized to the associated motor
load using manufacturer-supplied instructions and tables that did not
include manufacturers' tolerances and minimum voltage. PG&E policies
permitted use of the next higher thermal overload heater size if the
size selected from the table consistently caused a motor trip. 
The manufacturer-supplied instructions provide a table of heater
ranges. The full-load operating current is used with adjustments made
for variables such as ambient temperature and motor service factor.
The relay setpoint is based on the relay heater size that envelopes
the normal full-load current of the associated motor at the motor
nameplate voltage. This results in a nominal thermal overload relay
trip setpoint of 125 percent of the minimum heater element value.
Thermal overload relays used at DCPP have a manufacturers' tolerance
of +0/-15 percent. Therefore, use of a heater element chosen through
the manufacturer-supplied table may result in a relay setpoint that
could potentially trip the motor under normal operating conditions.
As an example:
Motor full-load current = 14.8 Amps
Typical heater range = 13.6 to 14.9 Amps
Associated thermal overload relay trip setpoint = (13.6 Amps)(1.25)
= 17 Amps
Thermal overload relay
minimum trip current = (0.85)(17 Amps)
(including negative
tolerance) = 14.45 Amps
Based on the above, the thermal overload relay could trip at any value
between 17 and 14.45 Amps. Therefore, the 14.8 Amp motor full-load
current could cause the relay to trip. Thermal overload relay trips
typically occur during initial plant startup testing. These
conditions are corrected by installing the next higher heater element.
With this next higher heater element, the motor full-load current may
not fall within the relay trip band, but normal motor operation at
90 percent of rated motor voltage may still not be assured. At
90 percent of rated voltage, the motor requires approximately
10 percent more current than the rated full-load current, but the
negative manufacturing tolerance may not prevent an inadvertent trip.
Following discovery and subsequent investigation of the setpoint issue
in July 1990, 65 thermal overload relays (including non-Class lE
relays) were determined to not meet all of the worst-case design
requirements. The majority of these relays were associated with fan
motors rather than pump motors. This is to be expected since
manufacturers typically provide a larger pump motor than necessary to
allow for runout conditions. Fan motors normally operate very near
the motor nameplate horsepower following damper adjustments and system
balancing and typically do not have oversize motors. 

480V Magnetic Trip Molded Case Circuit Breakers
The circuit breakers function to isolate fault conditions from the
electrical distribution system. The circuit breakers must be set high
enough so that large inrush currents during starting of the motors at
maximum voltage conditions do not trip the breakers needlessly. With
the as-found setpoints, the possibility existed that several of the
breakers might trip when starting the associated motors due to
insufficient allowance for manufacturers' tolerances.
Investigation determined that the original circuit breaker setpoint
calculations had only taken into account normal operating voltages.
The CMEP circuit breaker setpoint calculations account for maximum
voltages. Based on constant impedance characteristics of induction
motors during starting conditions, higher voltages will result in
correspondingly higher starting inrush currents. Therefore, the
possibility existed that motors might trip when starting due to low
circuit breaker setpoints.
A total of 77 safety-related circuit breakers in Unit 1 and 69
safety-related circuit breakers in Unit 2 were determined to require
new setpoints.
B. Inoperable Structures, Components, or Systems That Contributed to the
Event:
None
C. Dates and Approximate Times for Major Occurrences:
. February 20, 1984: Event date. Unit 1 initial entry into Mode 4
(Hot Shutdown).
2. July 19, 1985: Event date. Unit 2 initial entry into Mode 4.
3. July 27, 1990: Discovery date. Engineer determined that
several protective device setpoints
recalculated during the CMEP differed from
existing setpoints.
D. Other Systems or Secondary Functions Affected:
None.
E. Method of Discovery:
The issue of incorrect protective device setpoints was discovered
during implementation of the setpoint documentation program portion of
the CMEP. Instead of using the manufacturer-supplied and motor 

nameplate data to determine the correct overload device setpoint, the
CMEP approach conservatively uses maximum and minimum voltages and
adds significant margin by use of device tolerances to calculate the
final setpoints. It should be noted that both of these methods are
currently used by the industry for establishing Class 1E thermal
overload protection applications, with the second method being more
conservative.
F Operator Actions:
None.
G. Safety System Responses;
None.
III. Cause of Event
A. Immediate Cause:
The existing thermal overload relay and circuit breaker setting
methodology did not envelope all the maximum and minimum voltage
conditions and manufacturers' tolerances necessary to ensure
compliance with the FSAR Update design criteria.
B Root Cause:
Procedures did not provide sufficient criteria or guidance to ensure
that overload relay and breaker setpoints would envelope the operating
range of voltages contained in the FSAR Update. Further, no guidance
or criteria were provided to assure that manufacturers' tolerances
were included in setpoint determinations to ensure that protective
devices would operate in ranges that were conservative for the
applications of the safety-related components (i.e., that the
components did not prematurely trip when operating voltages were
within the committed operating range of +/- 10 percent).
C. Contributory Causes:
The Delegation of Authority Letter written per Nuclear
Engineering Manual Procedure 3.9, "Delegation of Design
Authority," requires that NECS approve the 480V heater element
selections and changes made at DCPP. A more detailed review of
the selections and changes by NECS potentially could have
identified the impact of manufacturers' tolerances upon
operating ranges.
2. Manufacturers' thermal overload relay literature did not provide
tolerance information until 1985.
Analysis of Event
Thermal Overload Devices:
The potential existed that 460V ESF motors with thermal overload protection
setpoints based on 100 percent of motor current could have experienced
voltages in the 90 percent range. Under low voltage conditions, a motor
will draw a higher current and could trip on thermal overload even though
the motor mechanical load is still well within the motor capability limits.
Thermal overload relays for Class 1E 460V continuous duty motors were
selected using conventional sizing criteria published by the overload relay
manufacturers. These criteria do not consider either increased motor
current at 90 percent of motor nameplate voltage or negative trip tolerance
of the overload relay. Therefore, there may have been insufficient margin
in the overload device to accommodate increased motor current at minimum
design voltage and negative tolerance of the overload relays.
A thorough review was performed for all Class 1E thermal overload relays
used at DCPP. This review concluded that all these thermal overload relays
were sized based on nominal operating voltage. Although this margin did not
fully meet all design basis worst-case criteria (design margin is 10 percent
for undervoltage and 10 to 15 percent for relay tolerance), the probability
of an overload heater inappropriately tripping was low based on the
following considerations:
1. In the ampere ranges that would be experienced by an overload relay
during a degraded voltage design condition, the overload relay would require
at least 15 to 20 minutes to operate. Therefore, the degraded voltage
condition must have a duration of 15 to 20 minutes to cause a thermal
overload trip.
2. Sustained (15 to 20 minutes) undervoltage conditions are not a credible
event at DCPP. PG&E Standard Practice 440.11-2, "Transmission System
Voltage Control," requires a minimum of 500kV and 230kV to be maintained on
the transmission grids. Voltages below these values can only occur as a
result of a major system disturbance. The design of the transmission system
incorporates frequency-controlled automatic load shedding in conjunction
with generation excitation to assure a system response to maintain voltage,
and to separate from the system if voltage cannot be maintained. Should the
500kV system be lost, automatic transfer to the 230kV startup system will
occur to restore voltage to the plant. Should the 230kV system be lost, the
vital bus will transfer to the diesel generators (DG)(EK) to restore
voltage. The worst-case loss of the 500kV system followed by loss of the
230kV system causing minimum voltages is over in seconds. Therefore,
sustained minimum voltage is not considered to be a credible scenario at
DCPP.

3. The methodology used to determine the new thermal overload device
settings included additional conservatism, and in some cases resulted in the
specification of a heater element of higher range. However, operation with
a heater element of lower range does not present a safety concern because
the simultaneous coincidence of three conditions would be required to cause
a premature trip with the existing installed elements. The three conditions
are:
a) sustained (15 to 20 minutes) minimum voltage
b) maximum horsepower load requirements
c) relay worst-case 15 percent manufacturers' negative tolerance.
It is unlikely that these conditions could occur at the same time for a
period of long enough duration. Based on the inverse time characteristics
of thermal overload relays, in order for the relays to operate in the
percentage overcurrent ranges pertaining to this discussion, the minimum
trip current must be sustained for about 15 to 20 minutes. If the trip
current results from an undervoltage condition, then a sustained
undervoltage must persist for at least 15 to 20 minutes. However, as
discussed above, a sustained voltage condition is not a credible event at
DC PP.
4. The minimum design voltage as stated in the FSAR Update (90 percent of
460V) is conservative. Design calculations indicate that the minimum motor
voltage would be closer to 93 percent of 460V, and as such the minimum
margin would be increased. This is because the motors are rated at a
nominal voltage of 460V and are connected to a system that is rated at 480V.
The taps are set on the upstream transformer to maintain 480V.
5. The negative tolerance of the overload relays occurs over a range of
values that follows some statistical distribution (not available from the
manufacturer for review). The negative tolerance is the primary variable
that could potentially cause an inadvertent trip. However, it is highly
unlikely that two sets of randomly selected overload relays would have the
exact same tolerances and resultant trip point.
6. The application curves for the thermal overload relays are based on an
ambient temperature of 40 degrees centigrade. The manufacturers'
information states that for every degree below 40 an additional 1 percent
margin in the setpoint is gained. At DCPP, the average temperature at the
motor control centers (MCC)(ED) is 35 to 37 degrees centigrade, which will
provide an additional 3 to 5 percent of margin.
A test was performed in 1986 at DCPP to determine the generator's ability to
accept VARs during light load conditions (i.e., the ability of the generator
to operate with a leading rather than lagging power factor). During this
test, the generator was operated at its minimum nameplate rating (negative 5 

percent), and plant voltages were lowered to corresponding values and
measurements were taken. The 480V busses (BU)(ED) were lowered to as low as
436V (95 percent of 460V) and no unusual events (overload relay trips) were
recorded, even though several pieces of equipment that were susceptible to
tripping were operating at the time. Although actual operating time at this
voltage was not documented, based on conversations with plant personnel, it
was estimated to be in the 5 to 10 minute range. This supports the
assumption that sustained undervoltage would be required to produce overload
trips in the ranges under discussion.
Molded Case Circuit Breakers
The effect of manufacturers' tolerances on the instantaneous trip setting is
not a concern during minimum voltage conditions because of the motor
characteristics. When starting, a motor typically draws current
proportional to the bus voltage. As the voltage rises, the current drawn by
the motor also rises. Motors at DCPP are designed to have one to two
percent voltage drop at full-load current. However, when starting, the
motor will require more that six times normal current (inrush current) and
the voltage drop may be six to twelve percent. Thus, the motor is
guaranteed to see a voltage six to twelve percent lower than the bus voltage
when starting. If the bus voltage is at 10 percent over normal, the voltage
at the motor will be at least six percent lower. This lower voltage will
ensure that the circuit breaker will not trip.
Furthermore, when the motor is required to operate in an accident condition,
the plant busses are automatically transferred to the startup bus. The
startup bus is fed from the 230kV system, which has a higher impedance
network than the main generator source. Load flow studies at maximum system
voltages show that the bus voltages under accident conditions are a few
volts less than 460V (the rated motor voltages). Consequently, there is no
accident condition that could lead to a high voltage condition that would
trip the circuit breakers.
Conclusion:
This event did not result in a compromise to the safe operation of the
plant, and the health and safety of the public were not adversely affected.
V. Corrective Actions
A. Immediate Corrective Actions:
All affected safety-related thermal overload relays were
identified. New setpoint calculations were completed for all
the identified relays. 

2. Correctly sized heater elements were installed on all the
affected thermal overload relays.
All affected molded case circuit breakers were identified. New
setpoint calculations were completed for all affected circuit
breakers.
4. A design change package to revise Units 1 and 2 safety-related
molded case circuit breaker settings was issued.
5. A schedule to change circuit breaker settings and/or circuit
breakers identified in Corrective Action A4 was established.
B. Corrective Actions to Prevent Recurrence:
1. New criteria for determining thermal overload relay heater
element size that accounts for manufacturers' tolerances were
developed by NECS and transmitted to DCPP.
2. The NECS letter of delegation to DCPP regarding control of
molded case circuit breaker setpoints was revised to reflect
NECS control of setpoints.
3. Design criteria will be established to document the methodology
for calculating all safety-related and other critical electrical
protective device setpoints.
4. Delegation of Authority Letters and appropriate setpoint
procedures have been revised to establish clear
interdepartmental responsibility for the determination of
electrical protective device setpoints.
VI. Additional Information
A. Failed Components:
None.
B. Previous LERs on Similar Events:
None. 

May 4, 1992
PG&E Letter No. DCL-92-115
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission
ATTN: Document Control Desk
Washington, D.C. 20555
Re: Docket No. 50-275, OL-DPR-80
Docket No. 50-323, OL-DPR-82
Diablo Canyon Units 1 and 2
Licensee Event Report 1-84-046 - Voluntary
Electrical Protective Device Setpoints Not Adequate to Ensure
Compliance with Design Criteria Due to Programmatic Error
Gentlemen:
The enclosed voluntary Licensee Event Report (LER) concerning electrical
protective device setpoints is submitted for information purposes only
in accordance with the provisions described in Item 19 of
Supplement Number 1 to NUREG-1022. Specifically, this LER discusses the
condition of thermal overload relay heater element and molded case
circuit breaker manufacturers' setpoint tolerances having not been
properly considered when determining device setpoints. This condition
was discovered during PG&E's Configuration Management Enhancement
Program (CMEP).
PG&E presented these CMEP results at the entrance meeting of the 1991
NRC Electrical Distribution System Functional Inspection for Diablo
Canyon Power Plant Units 1 and 2. Also, the issue of manufacturers'
tolerances has been a topic in the industry for some time, as discussed
in Regulatory Guide 1.106 (1977), "Thermal Overload Protection for
Electric Motors on Motor-Operated Valves," the Limerick Generating
Station Independent Design Assessment (NRC Inspection Report
50-353/89-201), and IEEE-741 (1990), "IEEE Standard Criteria For the
Protection of Class lE Power Supplies and Equipment in Nuclear Power
Generating Stations." In light of the general industry awareness
regarding this issue, we postponed issuance of this report to allow for
complete investigation, formalization, scope determination, and
establishment of corrective actions. With this review now complete, we
believe that issuance of this LER may be of some benefit to the
industry.
This event has in no way affected the health and safety of the public.